The Project Gutenberg EBook of Sakoontala or The Lost Ring, by Kalidasa

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Sakoontala or The Lost Ring
       An Indian Drama

Author: Kalidasa

Release Date: April 27, 2004 [EBook #12169]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SAKOONTALA OR THE LOST RING ***




Produced by Charles Aldarondo, Keren Vergon, jayam and PG Distributed
Proofreaders






[S']AKOONTALÁ

OR THE LOST RING







AN INDIAN DRAMA






TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH PROSE AND VERSE
FROM THE SANSKRIT OF KÁLIDÁSA


BY


SIR MONIER MONIER-WILLIAMS, K.C.I.E.
M.A., D.C.L., LL.D., PH.D.
BODEN PROFESSOR OF SANSKRIT, HON. FELLOW OF UNIVERSITY
AND LATE FELLOW OF BALLIOL COLLEGE, OXFORD




PREFACE TO THE EIGHTH EDITION.

The fact that the following translation (first published in 1855) of
India's most celebrated drama has gone through seven editions, might
reasonably have absolved me from the duty of revising it.

Three years ago, however, I heard that Sir John Lubbock had thought
'[S']akoontalá' worthy of a place among the hundred best books of the
world, and had adopted my version of the original. I therefore
undertook to go through every line and once again compare the
translation with the Sanskrit, in the hope that I might be able to
give a few finishing touches to a performance which, although it had
been before the public for about forty years, was certainly not
perfect. The act of revision was a labour of love, and I can honestly
say that I did my best to make my representation of Kálidása's
immortal work as true and trustworthy as possible.

Another edition is now called for, but after a severely critical
examination of every word, I have only detected a few minor
unimportant points--and those only in the Introduction and Notes--in
which any alteration appeared to be desirable. Indeed it is probable
that the possessors of previous editions will scarcely perceive that
any alterations have been made anywhere.

Occasionally in the process of comparison a misgiving has troubled me,
and I have felt inclined to accuse myself of having taken, in some
cases, too great liberties with the Sanskrit original. But in the end
I have acquiesced in my first and still abiding conviction that a
literal translation (such as that which I have given in the notes of
my edition of the Sanskrit text) might have commended itself to
Oriental students, but would not have given a true idea of the beauty
of India's most cherished drama to general readers, whose minds are
cast in a European mould, and who require a translator to clothe
Oriental ideas, as far as practicable, in a dress conformable to
European canons of taste.

And most assuredly such a translation would never have adapted itself
to actual representation on a modern stage as readily as it now
appears that my free version has done. It has gratified me exceedingly
to find that youthful English-speaking Indians--cultured young men
educated at the Universities of Calcutta, Madras and Bombay--have acted
the [S']akoontalá, in the very words of my translation with the greatest
success before appreciative audiences in various parts of India.

And lest any one in this country should be sceptical as to the
possibility of interesting a modern audience in a play written
possibly as early as the third or fourth century of our era (see p.
xvi), I here append an extract from a letter received by me in 1893
from Mr. V. Padmanabha Aiyar, B.A., resident at Karamanai, Trivandrum,
Travancore.

'SIVEN COIL STREET, TRIVANDRUM,

_'May 1, 1893_.

'The members of the "Karamanai Young Men's Mutual Improvement Society"
acted your translation of "[S']akoontalá" on the 3rd and 5th of
September last year, in the Government Museum Theatre, Trivandrum.

'It was acted in two parts. On the first day Acts I to IV were acted,
and on the second the remaining three Acts.

'All our chief native officials and many Europeans and their ladies
honoured the occasion with their presence. We acted it a second time
at the special request of H.H. the Second Prince of Travancore, in the
Palace of His Highness' mother, the Junior Ránee.

'The public were kind enough to pronounce it a success. In many cases
the applause given was not so much for the acting as for the beauty of
your translation. The Hindús have a great liking for this play, and
not one of the enlightened Hindú community will fail to acknowledge
your translation to be a very perfect one. Our object in acting Hindú
plays is to bring home to the Hindús the good lessons that our ancient
authors are able to teach us. If there is one lesson in these days
more than another which familiarity with the fountains of Western
literature constantly forces upon the mind, it is that our age is
turning its back on time-honoured creeds and dogmas. We are hurrying
forward to a chaos in which all our existing beliefs, nay even the
fundamental axioms of morality, may in the end be submerged; and as
the general tenor of Indian thought among the educated community is to
reject everything that is old, and equally blindly to absorb
everything new, it becomes more and more an urgent question whether
any great intellectual or moral revolution, which has no foundations
in the past, can produce lasting benefits to the people.

'"I desire no future that will break the ties of the past" is what
George Eliot has said, and so it is highly necessary that the Hindús
should know something of their former greatness.

'The songs in [S']akoontalá, one in the Prologue and another in the
beginning of the fifth Act, very easily adapted themselves to Hindú
tunes.'

Towards the end of his letter Mr. Aiyar intimated that he himself took
the part of Má[T.]Havya. He also mentioned that a few modifications and
additions were introduced into some of the scenes.

In a subsequent letter received from Mr. Keshava Aiyar, the Secretary
of the Society, I was informed that my version of the Play was acted
again at Trivandrum in 1894.

These descriptions of the successful representation of the [S']akoontalá
in Travancore justified me in expressing a hope that, as Kálidása has
been called the Shakespeare of India, so the most renowned of his
three dramatic works might, with a few manifestly necessary
modifications, be some day represented, with equal success, before
English-speaking audiences in other parts of the world and especially
here in England. This hope has been realized, and quite recently my
translation has been successfully acted by amateur actors before a
London audience.

I venture, therefore, to add the expression of a further hope that
with the daily growth of interest in Oriental literature, and now that
the [S']akoontalá forms one of Sir John Lubbock's literary series, it
may be more extensively read by the Rulers of India in all parts of
the Empire. Those who study it attentively cannot fail to become
better acquainted with the customs and habits of thought, past and
present, of the people committed to their sway.

And it cannot be too often repeated that our duty towards our great
Dependency requires us to do something more than merely rule justly.
We may impart high education, we may make good laws, we may administer
impartial justice, we may make roads, lay down railroads and
telegraphs, stimulate trade, accomplish amazing engineering
feats--like that lately achieved at Periyar--increase the wealth and
develop the resources of our vast Eastern territories; but unless we
seek to understand the inhabitants, unless we think it worth while to
study their ancient literatures, their religious ideas, and
time-honoured institutions, unless we find in them something to admire
and respect, we can never expect any reciprocity of esteem and respect
on their part--we can never look forward to a time when the present
partition-wall, which obstructs the free Interchange of social
relations between European and Asiatic races, will be entirely
removed.

MONIER MONIER-WILLIAMS, _December, 1898_.




INTRODUCTION


About a century has elapsed since the great English Orientalist, Sir
William Jones, astonished the learned world by the discovery of a
Sanskrit Dramatic Literature. He has himself given us the history of
this discovery. It appears that, on his arrival in Bengal, he was very
solicitous to procure access to certain books called Nátaks, of which
he had read in one of the 'Lettres Édifiantes et Curieuses' written by
the Jesuit Missionaries of China. But, although he sought information
by consulting both Bráhmans and Europeans, he was wholly unable for
some time to satisfy his curiosity as to the nature of these books. It
was reported to him that they were not histories, as he had hoped, but
that they abounded with fables, and consisted of conversations in
prose and verse held before ancient Rájás, in their public assemblies.
Others, again, asserted that they were discourses on dancing, music,
and poetry. At length, a sensible Bráhman, conversant with European
manners, removed all his doubts, and gave him no less delight than
surprise, by telling him that the English nation had compositions of
the same sort, which were publicly represented at Calcutta in the cold
season, and bore the name of 'plays.' The same Bráhman, when asked
which of these Nátaks was most universally esteemed, answered without
hesitation, '[S']akoontalá.'

It may readily be imagined with what interest, the keen Orientalist
received this communication; with what rapidity he followed up the
clue; and, when at length his zeal was rewarded by actual possession
of a MS. copy of one of these dramas, with what avidity he proceeded
to explore the treasures which for eighteen hundred years had remained
as unknown to the European world as the gold-fields of Australia.

The eacal as his own, I have at least done my best to avoid
diluting them by unwarrantable paraphrases or additions. If the
English verses are prosaic, I have the satisfaction of knowing that by
resisting the allurements of rhyme, I have done all in my power to
avoid substituting a fictitious and meagre poem of my own for the
grand, yet simple and chaste creation of Kálidása.

The unrestricted liberty of employing hypermetrical lines of eleven
syllables, sanctioned by the highest authority in dramatic
composition, has, I think, facilitated the attainment of this object.
One of our own poets has said in relation to such lines: 'Let it be
remembered that they supply us with another cadence; that they add, as
it were, a string to the instrument; and--by enabling the poet to
relax at pleasure, to rise and fall with his subject--contribute what
most is wanted, compass and variety. They are nearest to the flow of
an unstudied eloquence, and should therefore be used in the drama[4].'
Shakespeare does not scruple to avail himself of this licence four or
five times in succession, as in the well-known passage beginning--

  'To be or not to be, that is the question';

and even Milton uses the same freedom once or twice in every page.

The poetical merit of Kálidása's '[S']akoontalá' is so universally
admitted that any remarks on this head would be superfluous. I will
merely observe that, in the opinion of learned natives, the Fourth
Act, which describes the departure of [S']akoontalá from the hermitage,
contains the most obvious beauties; and that no one can read this Act,
nor indeed any part of the play, without being struck with the
richness and elevation of its author's genius, the exuberance and glow
of his fancy, his ardent love of the beautiful, his deep sympathy with
Nature and Nature's loveliest scenes, his profound knowledge of the
human heart, his delicate appreciation of its most refined feelings,
his familiarity with its conflicting sentiments and emotions. But in
proportion to the acknowledged excellence of Kálidása's composition,
and in proportion to my own increasing admiration of its beauties, is
the diffidence I feel lest I may have failed to infuse any of the
poetry of the original into the present version. Translation of poetry
must, at the best, resemble the process of pouring a highly volatile
and evanescent spirit from one receptacle into another. The original
fluid will always suffer a certain amount of waste and evaporation.

The English reader will at least be inclined to wonder at the
analogies which a thoroughly Eastern play offers to our own dramatic
compositions written many centuries later. The dexterity with which
the plot is arranged and conducted, the ingenuity with which the
incidents are connected, the skill with which the characters are
delineated and contrasted with each other, the boldness and felicity
of the diction, are scarcely unworthy of the great dramatists of
European countries. Nor does the parallel fail in the management of
the business of the stage, in minute directions to the actors, and
various scenic artifices. The asides and aparts, the exits and the
entrances, the manner, attitude, and gait of the speakers, the tone of
voice with which they are to deliver themselves, the tears, the
smiles, and the laughter, are as regularly indicated as in a modern
drama.

In reference to the constitution and structure of the play here
translated, a few general remarks on the dramatic system of the Hindús
may be needed[5].

Dramatic poetry is said to have been invented by the sage Bharata,
who lived at a very remote period of Indian history, and was the
author of a system of music. The drama of these early times was
probably nothing more than the Indian Nách-dance (Nautch) of the
present day. It was a species of rude pantomime, in which dancing and
movements of the body were accompanied by mute gestures of the hands
and face, or by singing and music. Subsequently, dialogue was added,
and the art of theatrical representation was brought to great
perfection. Elaborate treatises were written which laid down minute
regulations for the construction and conduct of plays, and subjected
dramatic composition to highly artificial rules of poetical and
rhetorical style. For example, the Sáhitya-darpana divides Sanskrit
plays into two great classes, the Rúpaka or principal dramas, and the
Uparúpaka or minor dramas. At the head of the ten species of Rúpaka
stands the Nátaka, of which the '[S']akoontalá' is an example. It should
consist of from five to ten Acts; it should have a celebrated story
for its plot; it should represent heroic or godlike characters and
good deeds; it should be written in an elaborate style, and be full of
noble sentiments. Moreover, it should be composed like the end of a
cow's tail; so that each of the Acts be gradually shorter.

In India, as in Greece, scenic entertainments took place at religious
festivals, and on solemn public occasions. Kalidása's '[S']akoontalá'
seems to have been acted at the commencement of the summer season--a
period peculiarly sacred to Káma-deva, the Indian god of love. We are
told that it was enacted before an audience 'consisting chiefly of men
of education and discernment.' As the greater part of every play was
written in Sanskrit, which, although spoken by the learned in every
part of India even at the present day, was certainly not the
vernacular language of the country at the time when the Hindú dramas
were performed, few spectators would be present who were not of the
educated classes. This circumstance is in accordance with the
constitution of Hindú society, whereby the productions of literature
as well as the offices of state, were reserved for the privileged
castes[6].

Every Sanskrit play opens with a prologue, or, to speak more
correctly, an introduction, designed to prepare the way for the
entrance of the _dramatis personæ_. The prologue commences with a
benediction or prayer (pronounced by a Bráhman, or if the
stage-manager happened to be of the Bráhmanical caste, by the manager
himself), in which the poet invokes the favour of the national deity
in behalf of the audience. The blessing is generally followed by a
dialogue between the manager and one or two of the actors, in which an
account is given of the author of the drama, a complimentary tribute
is paid to the critical acumen of the spectators, and such a reference
is made to past occurrences or present circumstances as may be
necessary for the elucidation of the plot. At the conclusion of the
prologue, the manager, by some abrupt exclamation, adroitly introduces
one of the dramatic personages, and the real performance commences.

The play, being thus opened, is carried forward in scenes and Acts;
each scene being marked by the entrance of one character and the exit
of another, as in the French drama. The _dramatis personæ_ were
divided into three classes--the inferior characters (nicha), who were
said to speak Prákrit in a monotonous accentless tone of voice
(anudáttoktyá); the middling (madhyama), and the superior (pradhána),
who were said to speak Sanskrit with accent, emphasis, and expression
(udáttoktyá). In general, the stage is never left vacant till the end
of an Act, nor does any change of locality take place until then. The
commencement of a new Act is often marked, like the commencement of
the piece, by an introductory monologue or dialogue spoken by one or
more of the _dramatis personæ_, and called Vishkambha or Prave[S']aka.
In this scene allusion is frequently made to events supposed to have
occurred in the interval of the Acts, and the audience is the better
prepared to take up the thread of the story, which is then skilfully
carried on to the concluding scene. The piece closes, as it began,
with a prayer for national plenty and prosperity, addressed to the
favourite deity, and spoken by one of the principal personages of the
drama.

Although, in the conduct of the plot, and the delineation of
character, Hindú dramatists show considerable skill, yet they do not
appear to have been remarkable for much fertility of invention. Love,
according to Hindú notions, is the subject of most of their dramas.

The hero, who is generally a king, and already the husband of a wife
or wives (for a wife or two more or less is no encumbrance in Indian
plays), is suddenly smitten with the charms of a lovely woman,
sometimes a nymph, or, as in the case of [S']akoontalá, the daughter of
a nymph by a mortal father. The heroine is required to be equally
impressible, and the first tender glance from the hero's eye reaches
her heart. With true feminine delicacy, however, she locks the secret
of her passion in her own breast, and by her coyness and reserve keeps
her lover for a long period in the agonies of suspense. The hero,
being reduced to a proper state of desperation, is harassed by other
difficulties. Either the celestial nature of the nymph is in the way
of their union, or he doubts the legality of the match, or he fears
his own unworthiness, or he is hampered by the angry jealousy of a
previous wife. In short, doubts, obstacles, and delays make great
havoc of both hero and heroine. They give way to melancholy, indulge
in amorous rhapsodies, and become very emaciated. So far, it must be
confessed, the story is decidedly dull, and its chain, however, does
not commence until the Fourth Act, when the union of the heroine with
King Dushyanta, and her acceptance of the marriage-ring as a token of
recognition, are supposed to have taken place. Then follows the King's
departure and temporary desertion of his bride; the curse pronounced
on [S']akoontalá by the choleric Sage; the monarch's consequent loss of
memory; the bride's journey to the palace of her husband; the
mysterious disappearance of the marriage-token; the public repudiation
of [S']akoontalá; her miraculous assumption to closes, as it began, with
a prayer for national plenty and prosperity, addr
Wilson and E.B. Cowell, and the Málavikágnimitra, by Professor Weber,
the eminent Orientalist of Berlin.]

[Footnote 3: The following is an extract from, the _Bombay Times_ of
February 3, 1855. It is given _literatim_, and the orthographical
errors and mutilation of the story prove that in those days a good and
complete version of India's most celebrated drama was not obtainable.

'HINDU DRAMA. 'SATURDAY, 3D FEBRUARY 1855.

'An outline of the play to be performed at the Theatre this night.

'After a short discourse between the Sutradhar (the chief actor) and
the Vidúshaka (the clown), Surswati (the Goddess of learning) will
appear. Sutradhar will call his wife (Nati), and they will determine
on performing the play of Shakuntala. They both will sing songs
together, after which Nati will go away. The play will then regularly
commence. Dushanta Rajah will appear in the Court, and order his
Pradhan (the Minister) to make preparations for a hunting excursion.
The Rajah, sitting in his carriage, will pursue a stag, the stag will
disappear, upon which Dushanta will ask his coachman the cause
thereof, this being known, the Rajah in his carriage will proceed
farther, when they will see the stag again, upon which he will aim an
arrow at the stag. The stag will run and reach the retirement of
Waikhanas Rushi. The sage will come out of his hut and remonstrate
with the Rajah against his killing the harmless animal. The Rajah will
obey the injunctions of the sage, who will pronounce benedictions upon
him. According to the Rushi's instructions, he will prepare to proceed
to the residence of another sage named Kunwa. Bidding each other
farewell, the Rushi will go to procure material for his religious
ceremonies. After reaching Kunwa's place, and commanding his coachman
to groom the horses, the Rajah will walk forth to the sage's hut.
Observing on his way thither Shakuntala with her fellow mates watering
the trees, he will hide himself behind a tree. Shakuntala will praise
to her mates the beauty of the Keshar tree. Charmed with overhearing
her discourse, Dushanta will try to find out her descent. Shakuntala
will be very much teased by a Bhramar (fly) hovering about her face.
The Rajah will then come forward and ask the cause of the disturbed
state of her mind. After a mutual exchange of polite respect they all
take their seats beneath a shady tree, Dushanta will inform her of his
country and descent, whereupon they will all go to the Rushi's hut.

'Here there is a pause. A pleasing farce will then be performed.'

I have already stated that the '[S']akoontalá' in the words of my own
translation has been since performed at Bombay and recently at
Trivandrum, the capital of Travancore (see Preface to this edition, p.
vii, &c).]

[Footnote 4: Rogers' Italy, note to line 23.]

[Footnote 5: The admirable Essay by Professor H.H. Wilson, prefixed to
his Hindú Theatre, is the principal source of the information which I
have here given.]

[Footnote 6: Wilson's Hindú Theatre, p. xii.]




RULES FOR THE PRONUNCIATION OF
THE PROPER NAMES.

Observe, that in order to secure the correct pronunciation of the
title of this Drama, 'Sakuntalá' has been spelt '[S']akoontalá,' the
_u_ of [S']akuntalá being pronounced like the _u_ in the English
word _rule_.

The vowel _a_ must invariably be pronounced with a dull sound,
like the _a_ in _organ_, or the _u_ in _gun, sun. Dushyanta_ must
therefore be pronounced as if written _Dooshyunta_. The long
vowel _á_ is pronounced like the _a_ in _last, cart_; _i_ like
the _i_ in _pin, sin_; _í_ like the _i_ in _marine_; _e_ like the
_e_ in _prey_; _o_ like the _o_ in _so_; _ai_ like the _ai_ in
_aisle_; _au_ like _au_ in the German word _haus_, or like the
_ou_ in _our_.

The consonants are generally pronounced as in English, but _g_
has always the sound of _g_ in _gun, give_, never of _g_ in
_gin_. S with the accent over it (s), has the sound of _s_ in
_sure_, or of the last _s_ in _session_.

       *       *       *       *       *



PERSONS REPRESENTED.

       *       *       *       *       *


DUSHYANTA,    _King of India_.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA,    _the jester, friend, and companion of the King_.

KANWA,        _chief of the hermits, foster-father of_ [S']AKOONTALÁ.

[S']ÁRNGARAVA,}
            } _two Bráhmans, belonging to the hermitage of KANWA_.
[S']ÁRADWATA, }

MITRÁVASU,    _brother-in-law of the King, and superintendent of the
              city police_.

JÁNUKA        _and_ SÚCHAKA, _two constables_.

VÁTÁYANA,     _the chamberlain or attendant on the women's
               apartments_.

SOMARÁTA,     _the domestic priest_.

KARABHAKA,    _a messenger of the queen-mother_.

RAIVATIKA,    _the warder or doorkeeper_.

MÁTALI,       _charioteer of Indra_.

SARVA-DAMANA, _afterwards_ BHARATA, _a little boy, son
              of_ DUSHYANTA by [S']AKOONTALÁ.

KA[S']YAPA,      _a divine sage, progenitor of men and gods, son of_
              MARÍCHI, _and grandson of_ BRAHMÁ.

[S']AKOONTALÁ,   _daughter of the sage_ VI[S']WÁMITRA _and the
              nymph_ MENAKÁ, _foster-child of the hermit_ KANWA.

PRIYAMVADÁ    _and_ ANASÚYÁ, _female attendants, companions
              of_ [S']AKOONTALÁ.

GAUTAMÍ,      _a holy matron, Superior of the female inhabitants
              of the hermitage_.

VASUMATÍ,     _the Queen of_ DUSHYANTA.

SÁNUMATÍ,     _a nymph, friend of_ [S']AKOONTALÁ.

TARALIKÁ,     _personal attendant of the Queen_.

CHATURIKÁ,    _personal attendant of the King_.

VETRAVATÍ,    _female warder or doorkeeper_.

PARABHRITIKÁ}  _and_

MADHUKARIKÁ,}  _maidens in charge of the royal gardens_.

SUVRATÁ,       _a nurse_.

ADITI,         _wife of_ KA[S']YAPA; _granddaughter of_ BRAHMÁ
               _through her father_ DAKSHA.

CHARIOTEER, FISHERMAN, OFFICERS, AND HERMITS.






[S']AKOONTALÁ; OR, THE LOST RING.


PROLOGUE.


BENEDICTION.

  Í[S']a preserve you [1]! he who is revealed
  In these eight forms[2] by man perceptible--
  Water, of all creation's works the first;
  The Fire that bears on high the sacrifice
  Presented with solemnity to heaven;
  The Priest, the holy offerer of gifts;
  The Sun and Moon, those two majestic orbs,
  Eternal marshallers of day and night;
  The subtle Ether, vehicle of sound,
  Diffused throughout the boundless universe;
  The Earth, by sages called 'The place of birth
  Of all material essences and things';
  And Air, which giveth life to all that breathe.

STAGE-MANAGER.

       [_After the recitation of the benediction_.]

                             [_Looking toward the living-room_.]

Lady, when you have finished attiring yourself, come this way.

ACTRESS.

                                                   [_Entering_.]

Here I am, Sir; what are your commands?

STAGE-MANAGER.

We are here before the eyes of an audience of educated and
discerning men[3]; and have to represent in their presence a new
drama composed by Kálidása, called '[S']akoontalá; or, the Lost
Ring[4].' Let the whole company exert themselves to do justice to
their several parts.

ACTRESS.

You, Sir, have so judiciously managed the cast of the characters,
that nothing will be defective in the acting.

STAGE-MANAGER.

Lady, I will tell you the exact state of the case,

  No skill in acting can I deem complete,
  Till from the wise the actor gain applause;
  Know that the heart e'en of the truly skilful,
  Shrinks from too boastful confidence in self.

ACTRESS.                                            [_Modestly_.]

You judge correctly And now, what are your commands?

STAGE-MANAGER.

What can you do better than engage the attention of the audience
by some captivating melody?

ACTRESS.

Which among the seasons shall I select as the subject of my song?

STAGE-MANAGER.

You surely ought to give the preference to the present Summer
season[5] that has but recently commenced, a season so rich in
enjoyment. For now

  Unceasing are the charms of halcyon days,
  When the cool bath exhilarates the frame;
  When sylvan gales are laden with the scent
  Of fragrant Pátalas[6]; when soothing sleep
  Creeps softly on beneath the deepening shade;
  And when, at last, the dulcet calm of eve
  Entrancing steals o'er every yielding sense.

ACTRESS.

I will:--

                                                       [_Sings_.]

  Fond maids, the chosen of their hearts to please,
  Entwine their ears with sweet [S']irísha flowers[7],
  Whose fragrant lips attract the kiss of bees
  That softly murmur through the summer hours.

STAGE-MANAGER.

Charmingly sung! The audience are motionless as statues, their
souls riveted by the enchanting strain. What subject shall we
select for representation, that we may ensure a continuance
of their favour?

ACTRESS.

Why not the same, Sir, announced by you at first? Let the drama
called '[S']akoontalá; or, the Lost Ring,' be the subject of our
dramatic performance.

STAGE-MANAGER.

Rightly reminded! For the moment I had forgotten it.

  Your song's transporting melody decoyed
  My thoughts, and rapt with ecstasy my soul;
  As now the bounding antelope allures
  The King Dushyanta[8] on the chase intent.

                                                       [_Exeunt_.




ACT I.

SCENE-_A Forest_.

_Enter King_ DUSHYANTA, _armed with a bow and arrow, in a
chariot, chasing an antelope, attended by his_ CHARIOTEER.

CHARIOTEER.

                    [_Looking at the deer, and then at the_ KING.

Great Prince,

  When on the antelope I bend my gaze,
  And on your Majesty, whose mighty bow
  Has its string firmly braced; before my eyes
  The god that wields the trident[9] seems revealed.
  Chasing the deer that flies from him in vain.

KING.

Charioteer, this fleet antelope has drawn us far from my
attendants. See! there he runs:

  Aye and anon his graceful neck he bends
  To cast a glance at the pursuing car;
  And dreading now the swift-descending shaft,
  Contracts into itself his slender frame;
  About his path, in scatude one moment.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.

Why so?

PRIYAMVADÁ

The Ke[S']ara-tree, whilst your graceful form bends about its stem,
appears as if it were wedded to some lovely twining creeper.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.

Ah! saucy girl, you are most appropriately named Priyamvadá
('Speaker of flattering things').

KING.

What Priyamvadá says, though complimentary, is nevertheless true.
Verily,

  Her ruddy lip vies with the opening bud;
  Her graceful arms are as the twining stalks;
  And her whole form is radiant with the glow
  Of youthful beauty, as the tree with bloom.

ANASÚYÁ.

See, dear [S']akoontalá, here is the young jasmine, which you
named 'the Moonlight of the Grove,' the self-elected wife of the
mango-tree. Have you forgotten it?

[S']AKOONTALÁ.

Rather will I forget myself.

                    [_Approaching the plant and looking at it_.]

How delightful is the season when the jasmine-creeper and the
mango-tree seem thus to unite in mutual embraces! The fresh
blossoms of the jasmine resemble the bloom of a young bride, and
the newly-formed shoots of the mango appear to make it her
natural protector.

                                       [_Continues gazing at it_.

PRIYAMVADÁ.

Do you know, my Anasúyá, why [S']akoontalá gazes so intently at the
jasmine?

ANASÚYÁ.

No, indeed, I cannot imagine. I pray thee tell me.

PRIYAMVADÁ.

She is wishing that as the jasmine is united to a suitable tree,
so, in like manner, she may obtain a husband worthy of her.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.

Speak for yourself, girl; this is the thought in your own mind.

                               [_Continues watering the flowers_.

KING.

Would that my union with her were permissible[23]! and yet I
hardly dare hope that the maiden is sprung from a caste different
from that of the Head of the hermitage. But away with doubt:

  That she is free to wed a warrior-king
  My heart attests. For, in conflicting doubts,
  The secret promptings of the good man's soul
  Are an unerring index of the truth.

However, come what may, I will ascertain the fact.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.                                      [_In a flurry_.

Ah! a bee, disturbed by the sprinkling of the water, has left the
young jasmine, and is trying to settle on my face.

                                    [_Attempts to drive it away_.

KING.                                  [_Gazing at her ardently_.

Beautiful! there is something charming even in her repulse.

  Where'er the bee his eager onset plies,
  Now here, now there, she darts her kindling eyes;
  What love hath yet to teach, fear teaches now,
  The furtive glances and the frowning brow.

                                             [_In a tone of envy_.

  Ah, happy bee! how boldly dost thou try
  To steal the lustre from her sparkling eye;
  And in thy circling movements hover near,
  To murmur tender secrets in her ear;
  Or, as she coyly waves her hand, to sip
  Voluptuous nectar from her lower lip!
  While rising doubts my heart's fond hopes destroy,
  Thou dost the fulness of her charms enjoy.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.

This impertinent bee will not rest quiet. I must move elsewhere.

[_Moving a few steps off, and casting a glance around_.]

How now! he is following me here. Help! my dear friends, help!
deliver me from the attacks of this troublesome insect.

PRIYAMVADÁ AND ANASÚYÁ.

How can we deliver you? Call Dushyanta to your aid. The sacred
groves are under the King's special protection.

KING.

An excellent opportunity for me to show myself.
Fear not--

[_Checks himself when the words are half-uttered; Aside_.]

But stay, if I introduce myself in this manner, they will know me
to be the King. Be it so, I will accost them, nevertheless.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.

                             [_Moving a step or two further off_.

What! it still persists in following me.

KING.                                       [_Advancing hastily_.

  When mighty Puru's offspring sways the earth,
  And o'er the wayward holds his threatening rod,
  Who dares molest the gentle maids that keep
  Their holy vigils here in Kanwa's grove?

[_All look at the_ KING, _and all are embarrassed_.

ANASÚYÁ.

Kind Sir, no outrage has been committed; only our dear friend
here was teased by the attacks of a troublesome bee.

                                        [_Points to_ [S']AKOONTALÁ.

KING.                                  [_Turning to_ [S']AKOONTALÁ.

I trust all is well with your devotional rites[24]?

                      [[S']AKOONTALÁ _stands confused and silent_.]

ANASÚYÁ.

All is well indeed, now that we are honoured by the reception of
a distinguished guest. Dear [S']akoontalá, go, bring from the
hermitage an offering of flowers, rice, and fruit. This water
that we have brought with us will serve to bathe our guest's
feet[25].

KING.

The rites of hospitality are already performed; your truly kind
words are the best offering I can receive.

PRIYAMVADÁ.

At least be good enough, gentle Sir, to sit down awhile, and rest
yourself on this seat shaded by the leaves of the Sapta-parna
tree[26].

KING.

You, too, must all be fatigued by your employment.

ANASÚYÁ.

Dear [S']akoontalá, there is no impropriety in our sitting by the
side of our guest; come, let us sit down here.

                                        [_All sit down together_.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.                                            [_Aside_.

How is it that the sight of this made me sensible of emotions
inconsistent with religious vows?

KING.                             [_Gazing at them all By turns_.

How charmingly your friendship is in keeping with the equality of
your ages and appearance!

PRIYAMVADÁ.                                  [_Aside to ANASÚYÁ_.

Who can this person be, whose lively yet dignified manner, and
polite conversation, bespeak him a man of high rank?

ANASÚYÁ.

I, too, my dear, am very curious to know. I will ask him myself.

[_Aloud_]

Your kind words, noble Sir, fill me with confidence, and prompt
me to inquire of what regal family our noble guest is the
ornament? what country is now mourning his absence? and what
induced a person so delicately nurtured to expose himself to the
fatigue of visiting this grove of penance?

[S']AKOONTALÁ.                                            [_Aside_.

Be not troubled, O my heart, Anasúyá is giving utterance to thy
thoughts.

KING.                                                   [_Aside_.

How now shall I reply? shall I make myself known, or shall I
still disguise my real rank? I have it; I will answer her thus.
[_Aloud_.] I am the person charged by his Majesty, the descendant
of Puru, with the administration of justice and religion; and am
come to this sacred grove to satisfy myself that the rites of the
hermits are free from obstruction.

ANASÚYÁ.

The hermits, then, and all the members of our religious society,
have now a guardian.

                      [[S']AKOONTALÁ _gazes bashfully at the_ KING.


PRIYAMVADÁ AND ANASÚYÁ.

      [_Perceiving the state of her feelings, and of the_ KING'S.
                                          _Aside to_ [S']AKOONTALÁ.

Dear [S']akoontalá, if father Kanwa were but at home to-day--

[S']AKOONTALÁ.                                           [_Angrily_.

What if he were?

PRIYAMVADÁ AND ANASÚYÁ.

He would honour this our distinguished guest with an offering of
the most precious of his possessions.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.

Go to! you have some silly idea in your minds, I will not listen
to such remarks.

KING.

May I be allowed, in my turn, to ask you maidens a few
particulars respecting your friend?

PRIYAMVADÁ AND ANASÚYÁ.

Your request, Sir, is an honour.

KING.

The sage Kanwa lives in the constant practice of austerities.
How, then, can this friend of yours be called his daughter?

ANASÚYÁ.

I will explain to you. Sir. You have heard of an illustrious sage
of regal caste, Vi[s']wámitra, whose family name is Kau[S']ika[27].

KING.

I have.

ANASÚYÁ.

Know that he is the real father of our friend. The venerable
Kanwa is only her reputed father. He it was who brought her up,
when she was deserted by her mother.

KING.

'Deserted by her mother!' My curiosity is excited; pray let me
hear the story from the beginning.

ANASÚYÁ.

You shall hear it, Sir. Some time since, this sage of regal
caste, while performing a most severe penance on the banks of the
river Godávarí, excited the jealousy and alarm of the gods;
insomuch that they despatched a lovely nymph named Menaká to
interrupt his devotions.

KING.

The inferior gods, I am aware, are jealous[28] of the power which
the practice of excessive devotion confers on mortals.

ANASÚYÁ.

Well, then, it happened that Vi[s']wámitra, gazing on the
bewitching beauty of that nymph at a season when, spring being in
its glory--

                            [_Stops short, and appears confused_.

KING.

The rest may be easily divined. [S']akoontalá, then, is the
offspring of the nymph.

ANASÚYÁ.

Just so.

KING.

It is quite intelligible.

  How would a mortal to such charms give birth?
  The lightning's radiance flashes not from earth.

       [[S']AKOONTALÁ _remains modestly seated with downcast eyes_.
                                                         _Aside_.]

And so my desire has really scope for its indulgence. Yet I am
still distracted by doubts, remembering the pleasantry of her
female companions respecting her wish for a husband.

PRIYAMVADÁ.

  [_Looking with a smile at [S']AKOONTALÁ, and then turning towards
                                                       the KING.]

You seem desirous, Sir, of asking something further.

           [[S']AKOONTALÁ _makes a chiding gesture with her finger_.

KING.

You conjecture truly. I am so eager to hear the particulars of
your friend's history, that I have still another question to ask.

PRIYAMVADÁ.

Scruple not to do so. Persons who lead the life of hermits may be
questioned unreservedly.

KING.

I wish to ascertain one pointAy; just as you are the cause of my crippled limbs.

KING.

How so?

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

Here are you living the life of a wild man of the woods in a
savage unfrequented region, while your State-affairs are left to
shift for themselves; and as for poor me, I am no longer master
of my own limbs, but have to follow you about day after day in
your chases after wild animals, till my bones are all crippled
and out of joint. Do, my dear friend, let me have one day's rest.

KING.                                                   [_Aside_.

This fellow little knows, while he talks in this manner, that my
mind is wholly engrossed by recollections of the hermit's
daughter, and quite as disinclined to the chase as his own.

  No longer can I bend my well-braced bow
  Against the timid deer; nor e'er again
  With well-aimed arrows can I think to harm
  These her beloved associates, who enjoy
  The privilege of her companionship;
  Teaching her tender glances in return.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.                         [_Looking in the King's face_.

I may as well speak to the winds, for any attention you pay to my
requests. I suppose you have something on your mind, and are
talking it over to yourself.

KING.                                                 [_Smiling_.

I was only thinking that I ought not to disregard a friend's
request.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

Then may the King live for ever!

                                                    [_Moves off_.

KING.

Stay a moment, my dear friend. I have something else to say to
you.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

Say on, then.

KING.

When you have rested, you must assist me in another business
which will give you no fatigue.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

In eating something nice, I hope.

KING.

You shall know at some future time.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

No time better than the present.

KING.

What ho, there!

WARDER.                                              [_Entering_.

What are your Majesty's commands?

KING.

O Raivatika, bid the General of the forces attend.

WARDER.

I will, Sire.

[_Exit and re-enters with the_ GENERAL.]

Come forward, General; his Majesty is looking towards you, and
has some order to give you.

GENERAL.                                  [_Looking at the_ KING.

Though hunting is known to produce ill effects, my royal master
has derived only benefit from it. For

  Like the majestic elephant that roams
  O'er mountain wilds, so does the King display
  A stalwart frame, instinct with vigorous life.
  His brawny arms and manly chest are scored
  By frequent passage of the sounding string;
  Unharmed he bears the midday sun; no toil
  His mighty spirit daunts; his sturdy limbs,
  Stripped of redundant flesh, relinquish nought
  Of their robust proportions, but appear
  In muscle, nerve, and sinewy fibre cased.

                                         [_Approaching the_ KING.

Victory to the King! We have tracked the wild beasts to their
lairs in the forest. Why delay, when everything is ready?

KING.

My friend Má[T.]Havya here has been disparaging the
chase, till he has taken away all my relish for it.

GENERAL.                                   [_Aside to_ MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

Persevere in your opposition, my good fellow; I will sound the
King's real feelings, and humour him accordingly.

                                                        [_Aloud_.

The blockhead talks nonsense, and your Majesty in your own person
furnishes the best proof of it. Observe, Sire, the advantage and
pleasure the hunter derives from the chase.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.                                            [_Angrily_.

Away! tempter, away! The King has recovered his senses, and is
himself again. As for you, you may, if you choose, wander about
from forest to forest, till some old bear seizes you by the nose,
and makes a mouthful of you.

KING.

My good General, as we are just now in the neighbourhood of a
consecrated grove, your panegyric upon hunting is somewhat
ill-timed, and I cannot assent to all you have said. For the
present,

  All undisturbed the buffaloes shall sport
  In yonder pool, and with their ponderous horns
  Scatter its tranquil waters, while the deer,
  Couched here and there in groups beneath the shade
  Of spreading branches, ruminate in peace.
  And all securely shall the herd of boars
  Feed on the marshy sedge; and thou, my bow,
  With slackened string, enjoy a long repose.

GENERAL.

So please your Majesty, it shall be as you desire.

KING.

Recall, then, the beaters who were sent in advance to surround
the forest. My troops must not be allowed to disturb this sacred
retreat, and irritate its pious inhabitants.

  Know that within the calm and cold recluse
  Lurks unperceived a germ of smothered flame,
  All-potent to destroy; a latent fire
  That rashly kindled bursts with fury forth;
  As in the disc of crystal[35] that remains
  Cool to the touch, until the solar ray
  Falls on its polished surface, and excites
  The burning heat that lies within concealed.

GENERAL.

Your Majesty's commands shall be obeyed.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

Off with you, you son of a slave! Your nonsense won't go down
here, my fine fellow.

                                                 [_Exit_ GENERAL.

KING.                               [_Looking at his attendants_.

Here, women, take my hunting-dress; and you, Raivatika, keep
guard carefully outside.

ATTENDANTS.

We will, Sire.

                                                       [_Exeunt_.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

Now that you have got rid of these plagues, who have been buzzing
about us like so many flies, sit down, do, on that stone slab,
with the shade of the tree as your canopy, and I will seat myself
by you quite comfortably.

KING.

Go you, and sit down first.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

Come along, then.

               [_Both walk on a little way, and seat themselves_.

KING.

Má[T.]Havya, it may be said of you that you have never beheld
anything worth seeing; for your eyes have not yet looked upon the
loveliest object in creation.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

How can you say so, when I see your Majesty before me at this
moment?

KING.

It is very natural that every one should consider his own friend
perfect; but I was alluding to [S']akoontalá, the brightest
ornament of these hallowed groves.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.                                              [_Aside_.

I understand well enough, but I am not going to humour him.

                                                        [_Aloud_.

If, as you intimate, she is a hermit's daughter, you cannot
lawfully ask her in marriage. You may as well then dismiss her
from your mind, for any good the mere sight of her can do.

KING.

Think you that a descendant of the mighty Puru could fix his
affections on an unlawful object?

  Though, as men say, the offspring of the sage,
  The maiden to a nymph celestial owes
  Her being, and by her mother left on earth,
  Was found and nurtured by the holy man
  As his own daughter, in this hermitage.
  So, when dissevered from its parent stalk,
  Some falling blossom of the jasmine[36], wafted
  Upon the sturdy sun-flower, is preserved
  By its support from premature decay.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.                                            [_Smiling_.

This passion of yours for a rustic maiden, when you have so many
gems of women at home in your palace, seems to me very like the
fancy of a man who is tired of sweet dates, and longs for sour
tamarinds as a variety.

KING.

You have not seen her, or you would not talk in this fashion.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

I can quite understand it must require something surpassingly
attractive to excite the admiration of such a great man as you.

KING.

I will describe her, my dear friend, in a few words,

  Man's all-wise Maker, wishing to create
  A faultless form, whose matchless symmetry
  Should far transcend Creation's choicest works,
  Did call together by his mighty will,
  And garner up in his eternal mind,
  A bright assemblage of all lovely things;
  And then, as in a picture, fashion them
  Into one perfect and ideal form--
  Such the divine, the wondrous prototype,
  Whence her fair shape was moulded into being.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

If that's the case, she must indeed throw all other beauties into
the shade.

KING.

To my mind she really does.

  This peerless maid is like a fragrant flower,
  Whose perfumed breath has never been diffused;
  A tender bud, that no profaning hand
  Has dared to sever from its parent stalk;
  A gem of priceless water, just released
  Pure and unblemished from its glittering bed.
  Or may the maiden haply be compared
  To sweetest honey, that no mortal lip
  Has sipped; or, rather, to the mellowed fruit
  Of virtuous actions in some former birth[37],
  Now brought to full perfection? Lives the man
  Whom bounteous heaven has destined to espouse her?

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

Make haste, then, to her aid; you have no time to lose, if you
don't wish this fruit of all the virtues to drop into the mouth
of some greasy-headed rustic of devout habits.

KING.

The lady is not her own mistress, and her foster-father is not at
home.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

Well, but tell me, did she look at all kindly upon you?

KING.

  Maidens brought up in a hermitage are naturally
  shy and reserved; but for all that
  She did look towards me, though she quick withdrew
  Her stealthy glances when she met my gaze;
  She smiled upon me sweetly, but disguised
  With maiden grace the secret of her smiles.
  Coy love was half unveiled; then, sudden checked
  By modesty, left half to be divined.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

Why, of course, my dear friend, you never could seriously expect
that at the very first sight she would fall over head ears in
love with you, and without more ado come and sit in your lap.

KING.

  When we parted from each other, she betrayed
  her liking for me by clearer indications, but still with the
                                               utmost modesty.
  Scarce had the fair one from my presence passed,
  When, suddenly, without apparent cause,
  She stopped; and, counterfeiting pain, eof one in love_.

KING.                                    [_Sighing thoughtfully_.

  The holy sage possesses magic power
  In virtue of his penance; she, his ward,
  Under the shadow of his tutelage,
  Rests in security, I know it well;
  Yet sooner shall the rushing cataract
  In foaming eddies re-ascend the steep,
  Than my fond heart turn back from its pursuit.

God of love! God of the flowery shafts [47]! we lovers are cruelly
deceived by thee, and by the Moon, however deserving of confidence
you may both appear.

  For not to us do these thine arrows seem
  Pointed with tender flowerets; not to us
  Doth the pale Moon irradiate the earth
  With beams of silver fraught with cooling dews;
  But on our fevered frames the moon-beams fall
  Like darts of fire, and every flower-tipt shaft
  Of Káma[47], as it probes our throbbing hearts,
  Seems to be barbed with hardest adamant.

Adorable god of love! hast thou no pity for me?

[_In a tone of anguish_.]

How can thy arrows be so sharp when they are pointed with
flowers? Ah! I know the reason:

  E'en now in thine unbodied essence lurks
  The fire of [S']iva's anger[48], like the flame
  That ever hidden in the secret depths
  Of ocean, smoulders there unseen[49]. How else
  Could'st thou, all immaterial as thou art,
  Inflame our hearts thus fiercely?--thou, whose form
  Was scorched to ashes by a sudden flash
  From the offended god's terrific eye.

Yet, methinks,

  Welcome this anguish, welcome to my heart
  These rankling wounds inflicted by the god,
  Who on his scutcheon bears the monster-fish[50]
  Slain by his prowess; welcome death itself,
  So that, commissioned by the lord of love,
  This fair one be my executioner.
  Adorable divinity! Can I by no reproaches excite your commiseration?
  Have I not daily offered at thy shrine
  Innumerable vows, the only food
  Of thine ethereal essence? Are my prayers
  Thus to be slighted? Is it meet that thou
  Should'st aim thy shafts at thy true votary's heart,
  Drawing thy bow-string even to thy ear?

[_Pacing up and down in a melancholy manner_.]

Now that the holy men have completed their rites, and have no
more need of my services, how shall I dispel my melancholy?

[_Sighing_.]

I have but one resource. Oh for another sight of the Idol of my
soul! I will seek her.

[_Glancing at the sun_.]

In all probability, as the sun's heat is now at its height,
[S']akoontalá is passing her time under the shade of the bowers on
the banks of the Máliní, attended by her maidens. I will go and
look for her there.

[_Walking and looking about_.]

I suspect the fair one has but just passed by this avenue of
young trees.

  Here, as she tripped along, her fingers plucked
  The opening buds; these lacerated plants,
  Shorn of their fairest blossoms by her hand,
  Seem like dismembered trunks, whose recent wounds
  Are still unclosed; while from the bleeding socket
  Of many a severed stalk, the milky juice
  Still slowly trickles, and betrays her path.

[_Feeling a breeze_.]

What a delicious breeze meets me in this spot!

  Here may the zephyr, fragrant with the scent
  Of lotuses, and laden with the spray
  Caught from the waters of the rippling stream,
  Fold in its close embrace my fevered limbs.

[_Walking and looking about_.]

She must be somewhere in the neighbourhood of this arbour of
overhanging creepers enclosed by plantations of cane;

[_Looking down_.]

  For at the entrance here I plainly see
  A line of footsteps printed in the sand.
  Here are the fresh impressions of her feet;
  Their well-known outline faintly marked in front,
  More deeply towards the heel; betokening
  The graceful undulation of her gait[51].

I will peep through those branches.

 [_Walking and looking. With transport_.]

Ah! now my eyes are gratified by an entrancing sight. Yonder is
the beloved of my heart reclining on a rock strewn with flowers,
and attended by her two friends. How fortunate! Concealed behind
the leaves, I will listen to their conversation, without raising
their suspicions.

                          [_Stands concealed, and gazes at them_.

[S']AKOONTALÁ _and her two attendants, holding fans in their hands,
are discovered as described_.

PRIYAMVADÁ AND ANASÚYÁ.

                         [_Fanning her. In a tone of affection_.

Dearest [S']akoontalá, is the breeze raised by these broad
lotus-leaves refreshing to you?

[S']AKOONTALÁ.

Dear friends, why should you trouble yourselves to fan me?

[PRIYAMVADÁ _and_ ANASÚYÁ _look sorrowfully at one another_.

KING.

[S']akoontalá seems indeed to be seriously ill.

[_Thoughtfully_.]

Can it be the intensity of the heat that has affected her? or
does my heart suggest the true cause of her malady?

[_Gazing at her passionately_.]

Why should I doubt it?

  The maiden's spotless bosom is o'erspread
  With cooling balsam; on her slender arm
  Her only bracelet, twined with lotus-stalks,
  Hangs loose and withered; her recumbent form
  Betokens languor. Ne'er could noon-day sun
  Inflict such fair disorder on a maid--
  No, love, and love alone, is here to blame.


PRIYAMVADÁ.                                  [_Aside to_ ANASÚYÁ.

I have observed, Anasúyá, that [S']akoontalá has been indisposed
ever since her first interview with King Dushyanta. Depend upon
it, her ailment is to be traced to that source.

ANASÚYÁ.

The same suspicion, dear, has crossed my mind. But I will at once
ask her and ascertain the truth.

[_Aloud_.]

Dear [S']akoontalá, I am about to put a question to you. Your
indisposition is really very serious.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.                       [_Half rising from her couch_.

What were you going to ask?

ANASÚYÁ.

We know very little about love-matters, dear [S']akoontalá; but for
all that, I cannot help suspecting your present state to be
something similar to that of the lovers we have heard about in
romances. Tell us frankly what is the cause of your disorder. It
is useless to apply a remedy, until the disease be understood.

KING.

Anasúyá bears me out in my suspicion.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.                                            [_Aside_.

I am, indeed, deeply in love; but cannot rashly
disclose my passion to these young girls.

PRIYAMVADÁ.

What Anasúyá says, dear [S']akoontalá, is very just. Why give so
little heed to your ailment? Every day you are becoming thinner;
though I must confess your complexion is still as beautiful as
ever.

KING.

Priyamvadá speaks most truly.

  Sunk is her velvet cheek; her wasted bosom
  Loses its fulness; e'en her slender waist
  Grows more attenuate; her face is wan,
  Her shoulders droop;--as when the vernal blasts
  Sear the young blossoms of the Mádhaví[52],
  Blighting their bloom; so mournful is the change.
  Yet in its sadness, fascinating still,
  Inflicted by the mighty lord of love
  On the fair figure of the hermit's daughter.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.

Dear friends, to no one would I rather reveal the nature of my
malady than to you; but I should only be troubling you.

PRIYAMVADÁ AND ANASÚYÁ.

Nay, this is the very point about which we are so solicitous.
Sorrow shared with affectionate friends is relieved of half its
poignancy.

KING.

  Pressed by the partners of her joys and griefs,
  Her much beloved companions, to reveal
  The cherished secret locked within her breast,
  She needs must utter it; although her looks
  Encourage me to hope, my bosom throbs
  As anxiously I listen for her answer.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.

Know then, dear friends, that from the first moment the
illustrious Prince who is the guardian of our sacred grove
presented himself to my sight--

                            [_Stops short, and appears confused_.

PRIYAMVADÁ AND ANASÚYÁ.

Say on, dear [S']akoontalá, say on.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.

Ever since that happy moment, my heart's affections have been
fixed upon him, and my energies of mind and body have all
deserted me, as you see.

KING.                                            [_With rapture_.

Her own lips have uttered the words I most longed to hear.

  Love lit the flame, and Love himself allays
  My burning fever, as when gathering clouds
  Rise o'er the earth in summer's dazzling noon,
  And grateful showers dispel the morning heat.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.

You must consent, then, dear friends, to contrive some means by
which I may find favour with the King, or you will have ere long
to assist at my funeral.

KING.

Enough! These words remove all my doubts.

PRIYAMVADÁ.                                  [_Aside to_ ANASÚYÁ.

She is far gone in love, dear Anasúyá, and no time ought to be
lost. Since she has fixed her affections on a monarch who is the
ornament of Puru's line, we need not hesitate for a moment to
express our approval.

ANASÚYÁ.

I quite agree with you.

PRIYAMVADÁ.                                             [_Aloud_.

We wish you joy, dear [S']akoontalá. Your affections are fixed on an
object in every respect worthy of you,. The noblest river will unite itself
to the ocean, and the lovely Mádhaví-creeper clings naturally to the
Mango, the only tree capable of supporting it.

KING.

Why need we wonder if the beautiful constellation Vi[s']ákhá pines
to be united with the Moon[53]?

ANASÚYÁ.

By what stratagem can we best secure to our friend the
accomplishment of her heart's desire both speedily and secretly?

PRIYAMVADÁ.

The latter point is all we have to think about. As to 'speedily,'
I look upon the whole affair as already settled.

ANASÚYÁ.

How so?

PRIYAMVADÁ.

Did you not observe how the King betrayed his liking by the
tender manner in which he gazed upon her, and how thin he has
become the last few days, as if he had been lying awake thinking
of her?

KING.                                      [_Looking at himself_.

Quite true! I certainly am becoming thin from want of sleep:

  As night by night in anxious thought I raise
  This wasted arm to rest my sleepless head,
  My jewelled bracelet, sullied by the tears
  That trickler now shall I betake myself? I will tarry for a brief space
in this bower of creepers, so endeared to me by the presence of
my beloved [S']akoontalá.

                                                [_Looking round_.

  Here printed on the flowery couch I see
  The fair impression of her slender limbs;
  Here is the sweet confession of her love,
  Traced with her nail upon the lotus-leaf;
  And yonder are the withered lily-stalks
  That graced her wrist. While all around I view
  Things that recall her image, can I quit
  This bower, e'en though its living be fled?

A VOICE IN THE AIR.

Great King,

  Scarce is our evening sacrifice begun,
  When evil demons, lurid as the clouds
  That gather round the dying orb of day,
  Cluster in hideous troops, obscene and dread,
  About our altars, casting far and near
  Terrific shadows, while the sacred fire
  Sheds a pale lustre o'er their ghostly shapes.

KING.

I come to the rescue, I come.

                                                         [_Exit_.

       *       *       *       *       *




PRELUDE TO ACT IV.


SCENE.--_The Garden of the Hermitage_.

_Enter_ PRIYAMVADÁ and ANASÚYÁ in the act of gathering flowers_.

ANASÚYÁ.

Although, dear Priyamvadá, it rejoices my heart to think that
[S']akoontalá has been happily united to a husband in every respect
worthy of her, by the form of marriage prevalent among Indra's
celestial musicians, nevertheless, I cannot help feeling somewhat
uneasy in my mind.

PRIYAMVADÁ.

How so?

ANASÚYÁ.

You know that the pious King was gratefully dismissed by the
hermits on the successful termination of their sacrificial rites.
He has now returned to his capital, leaving [S']akoontalá under our
care; and it may be doubted whether, in the society of his royal
consorts, he will not forget all that has taken place in this
hermitage of ours.

PRIYAMVADÁ.

On that score be at ease. Persons of his noble nature are not so
destitute of all honourable feeling. I confess, however, that
there is one point about which I am rather anxious. What, think
you, will Father Kanwa say when he hears what has occurred?

ANASÚYÁ.

In my opinion, he will approve the marriage.

PRIYAMVADÁ.

What makes you think so?

ANASÚYÁ.

From the first, it was always his fixed purpose to bestow the
maiden on a husband worthy of her; and since heaven has given her
such a husband, his wishes have been realized without any trouble
to himself.

PRIYAMVADÁ.                      [_Looking at the flower-basket_.

We have gathered flowers enough for the sacred offering, dear
Anasúyá.

ANASÚYÁ.

Well, then, let us now gather more, that we may have wherewith to
propitiate the guardian-deity of our dear [S']akoontalá.

PRIYAMVADÁ.

By all means.

                                      [_They continue gathering_.

A VOICE BEHIND THE SCENES.

Ho there! See you not that I am here!

ANASÚYÁ.

That must be the voice of a guest announcing his arrival.

PRIYAMVADÁ.

Surely, [S']akoontalá is not absent from the cottage.

[_Aside_.]

Her heart at least is absent, I fear.

ANASÚYÁ.

Come along, come along; we have gathered flowers
enough.

                                               [_They move away_.

THE SAME VOICE BEHIND THE SCENES.

Woe to thee, maiden, for daring to slight a guest like me!

  Shall I stand here unwelcomed--even I,
  A very mine of penitential merit,
  Worthy of all respect? Shalt thou, rash maid,
  Thus set at nought the ever sacred ties
  Of hospitality? and fix thy thoughts
  Upon the cherished object of thy love,
  While I am present? Thus I curse thee, then--
  He, even he of whom thou thinkest, he
  Shall think no more of thee; nor in his heart
  Retain thine image. Vainly shalt thou strive
  To waken his remembrance of the past;
  He shall disown thee, even as the sot,
  Roused from his midnight drunkenness, denies
  The words he uttered in his revellings.

PRIYAMVADÁ.

Alas! alas! I fear a terrible misfortune has occurred.
[S']akoontalá, from absence of mind, must have offended some guest
whom she was bound to treat with respect.

[_Looking behind the scenes_.]

Ah! yes; I see; and no less a person than the great sage
Durvásas[57], who is known to be most irascible. He it is that
has just cursed her, and is now retiring with hasty strides,
trembling with passion, and looking as if nothing could turn him.
His wrath is like a consuming fire.

ANASÚYÁ.

Go quickly, dear Priyamvadá, throw yourself at his feet, and
persuade him to come back, while I prepare a propitiatory
offering[59] for him, with water and refreshments.

PRIYAMVADÁ.

I will.

                                                         [_Exit_.

ANASÚYÁ.

[_Advancing hastily a few steps and stumbling_.

Alas! alas! this comes of being in a hurry. My foot has slipped,
and my basket of flowers has fallen from my hand.

                                      [_Stays to gather them up_.

PRIYAMVADÁ.                               [_Re-entering_

Well, dear Anasúyá, I have done my best; but what living being
could succeed in pacifying such a cross-grained, ill-tempered old
fellow? However, I managed to mollify him a little.

ANASÚYÁ                                               [_Smiling_.

Even a little was much for him. Say on.

PRIYAMVADÁ.

When he refused to turn back, I implored his forgiveness in these
words: 'Most venerable sage, pardon, I beseech you, this first
offence of a young and inexperienced girl, who was ignorant of
the respect due to your saintly character and exalted rank.'

ANASÚYÁ

And what did he reply?

PRIYAMVADÁ.

'My word must not be falsified; but, at the sight of the ring of
recognition the spell shall cease.' So saying, he disappeared.

ANASÚYÁ.

Oh! then we may breathe again; for, now I think of it, the King
himself, at his departure, fastened on [S']akoontalá's finger, as a
token of remembrance, a ring on which his own name was engraved.
She has, therefore, a remedy for her misfortune at her own
command.

PRIYAMVADÁ.

Come, dear Anasúyá, let us proceed with our religious duties.

                                              [_They walk round_.

PRIYAMVADÁ.                             [_Looking off the stage_.

See, Anasúyá, there sits our dear friend, motionless as a statue,
resting her face on her left hand, her whole mind absorbed in
thinking of her absent husband. She can pay no attention to
herself, much less to a stranger.

ANASÚYÁ.

Priyamvadá, let this affair never pass our lips. We must spare
our dear friend's feelings. Her constitution is too delicate to
bear much emotion.

PRIYAMVADÁ.

I agree with you. Who would think of watering a tender jasmine
with hot water?



ACT IV.

Scene.--_The Neighbourhood of the Hermitage.

Enter one of_ Kanwa's Pupils _just arisen from his couch at the
dawn of day_.

PUPIL.

My master, the venerable Kanwa, who is but lately returned from
his pilgrimage, has ordered me to ascertain how the time goes. I
have therefore come into the open air to see if it be still dark.

 [_Walking and looking about_.]

Oh! the dawn has already broken.

  Lo! in one quarter of the sky, the Moon,
  Lord of the herbs and night-expanding flowers,
  Sinks towards his bed behind the western hills;
  While in the east, preceded by the Dawn,
  His blushing charioteer[59], the glorious Sun
  Begins his course, and far into the gloom
  Casts the first radiance of his orient beams.
  Hail! co-eternal orbs, that rise to set,
  And set to rise again; symbols divine
  Of man's reverses, life's vicissitudes.

And now,

  While the round Moon withdraws his looming disc
  Beneath the western sky, the full-blown flower
  Of the night-loving lotus[60] sheds her leave
  In sorrow for his loss, bequeathing nought
  But the sweet memory of her loveliness
  To my bereaved sight; e'en as the bride
  Disconsolately mourns her absent lord,
  And yields her heart a prey to anxious grief.

ANASÚYÁ.                                    [_Entering abruptly_.

Little as I know of the ways of the world, I cannot help thinking
that King Dushyanta is treating [S']akoontalá very improperly.

PUPIL.

Well, I must let my revered preceptor know that it is time to
offer the burnt oblation.

                                                         [_Exit_.

ANASÚYÁ.

I am broad awake, but what shall I do? I have no energy to go
about my usual occupations. My hands and feet seem to have lost
their power. Well, Love has gained his object; and Love only is
to blame for having induced our dear friend, in the innocence of
her heart, to confide in such a perfidious man. Possibly,
however, the imprecation of Durvásas may he already taking
effect. Indeed, I cannot otherwise account for the King's strange
conduct, in allowing so long a time to elapse without even a
letter; and that, too, after so many promises and protestations.
I cannot think what to do unless we send him the ring which was
to be the token of recognition. But which of these austere
hermits could we ask to be the bearer of it? Then, again, Father
Kanwa has just returned from his pilgrimage; and how am I to
inform him of [S']akoontalá's marriage to King Dushyanta, and her
expectation of becoming soon a mother? I never could bring myself
to tell him, even if I felt that [S']akoontalá had been in fault,
which she certainly has not. What is to be done?

PRIYAMVADÁ.                                [_Entering;  joyfully_.

Quick! quick! Anasúyá! come and assist in the joyful preparations
for [S']akoontalá's departure to her husband's palace.

ANASÚYÁ.

My dear girl, what can you mean?

PRIYAMVADÁ.

Listen, now, and I will tell you all about it. I went just now to
[S']akoontalá, to inquire whether she had slept comfortably--

ANASÚYÁ.

Well, well; go on.

PRIYAMVADÁ.

She was sitting with her face bowed down to the very ground with
shame, when Father Kanwa entered, and, embracing her, of his own
accord offered her his congratulations. 'I give thee joy, my
child,'_.

GAUTAMÍ.

Daughter! the nymphs of the wood, who love thee with the
affection of a sister, dismiss thee with kind wishes for thy
happiness. Take thou leave of them reverentially.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.

[_Bowing respectfully and walking on. Aside to her friend_.

Eager as I am, dear Priyamvadá, to see my husband once more, yet
my feet refuse to move, now that I am quitting for ever the home
of my girlhood.

PRIYAMVADÁ.

You are not the only one, dearest, to feel the bitterness of
parting. As the time of separation approaches, the whole grove
seems to share your anguish.

  In sorrow for thy loss, the herd of deer
  Forget to browse; the peacock on the lawn
  Ceases its dance[67]; the very trees around
  Shed their pale leaves, like tears, upon the ground.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.                             [_Recollecting herself_.

My father, let me, before I go, bid adieu to my pet jasmine, the
Moonlight of the Grove[68]. I love the plant almost as a sister.

KANWA.

Yes, yes, my child, I remember thy sisterly affection for the
creeper. Here it is on the right.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.                          [_Approaching the jasmine_.

My beloved jasmine! most brilliant of climbing plants, how sweet
it is to see thee cling thus fondly to thy husband, the
mango-tree; yet, prithee, turn thy twining arms for a moment in
this direction to embrace thy sister; she is going far away, and
may never see thee again.

KANWA.

  Daughter, the cherished purpose of my heart
  Has ever been to wed thee to a man
  That should be worthy of thee; such a spouse
  Hast thou thyself, by thine own merits, won.
  To him thou goest, and about his neck
  Soon shalt thou cling confidingly, as now
  Thy favourite jasmine twines its loving arms
  Around the sturdy mango. Leave thou it
  To its protector--e'en as I consign
  Thee to thy lord, and henceforth from my mind
  Banish all anxious thought on thy behalf.

Proceed on thy journey, my child.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.                      [_To_ PRIYAMVADÁ _and_ ANASÚYÁ.

To you, my sweet companions, I leave it as a keepsake. Take
charge of it when I am gone.

PRIYAMVADÁ AND ANASÚYÁ.                   [_Bursting into tears_.

And to whose charge do you leave us, dearest? Who will care for
us when you are gone?

KANWA.

For shame, Anasúyá! dry your tears. Is this the way to cheer your
friend at a time when she needs your support and consolation?

                                                  [_All move on_.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.

My father, see you there my pet deer, grazing close to the
hermitage? She expects soon to fawn, and even now the weight of
the little one she carries hinders her movements. Do not forget
to send me word when she becomes a mother.

KANWA.

I will not forget it.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.                       [_Feeling herself drawn back_.

What can this be, fastened to my dress?

                                                  [_Turns round_.

KANWA.

My daughter,

  It is the little fawn, thy foster-child,
  Poor helpless orphan! it remembers well
  How with a mother's tenderness and love
  Thou didst protect it, and with grains of rice
  From thine own hand didst daily nourish it;
  And, ever and anon, when some sharp thorn
  Had pierced its mouth, how gently thou didst tend
  The bleeding wound, and pour in healing balm.
  The grateful nursling clings to its protectress,
  Mutely imploring leave to follow her.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.

My poor little fawn! dost thou ask to follow an ungrateful
wretch who hesitates not to desert her companions! When thy
mother died, soon after thy birth, I supplied her place, and
reared thee with my own hand; and now that thy second mother is
about to leave thee, who will care for thee? My father, be thou a
mother to her. My child, go back, and be a daughter to my father.

                                            [_Moves on, weeping_.

KANWA.

  Weep not, my daughter, check the gathering tear
  That lurks beneath thine eyelid, ere it flow
  And weaken thy resolve; be firm and true--
  True to thyself and me; the path of life
  Will lead o'er hill and plain, o'er rough and smooth,
  And all must feel the steepness of the way;
  Though rugged be thy course, press boldly on.

[S']ÁRNGARAVA.

Venerable Sire! the sacred precept is:--'Accompany thy friend as
far as the margin of the first stream.' Here, then, we are
arrived at the border of a lake. It is time for you to give us
your final instructions and return.

KANWA.

Be it so; let us tarry for a moment under the shade of this
fig-tree[69].

[_They do so_.

KANWA                                                   [_Aside_.

I must think of some appropriate message to send to his Majesty
King Dushyanta.

[_Reflects_. .

[S']AKOONTALÁ.                                 [_Aside to_ ANASÚYÁ.

See, see, dear Anasúyá, the poor female Chakraváka-bird[70], whom
cruel fate dooms to nightly separation from her mate, calls to
him in mournful notes from the other side of the stream, though
he is only hidden from her view by the spreading leaves of the
water-lily. Her cry is so piteous that I could almost fancy she
was lamenting her hard lot in intelligible words.

ANASÚYÁ

Say not so, dearest:

  Fond bird! though sorrow lengthen out her night
  Of widowhood, yet with a cry of joy
  She hails the morning light that brings her mate
  Back to her side. The agony of parting
  Would wound us like a sword, but that its edge
  Is blunted by the hope of future meeting.

KANWA.

[S']árngarava! when you have introduced [S']akoontalá into the
presence of the King, you must give him this message from me:--

[S']ÁRNGARAVA

Let me hear it, venerable father.

KANWA.

This is it:--

  Most puissant prince! we here present before thee
  One thou art bound to cherish and receive
  As thine own wife; yea, even to enthrone
  As thine own queen--worthy of equal love
  With thine imperial consorts. So much, Sire,
  We claim of thee as justice due to us,
  In virtue of our holy character,
  In virtue of thine honourable rank,
  In virtue of the pure spontaneous love
  That secretly grew up 'twixt thee and her,
  Without consent or privity of us.
  We ask no more--the rest we freely leave
  To thy just feeling and to destiny.

[S']ÁRNGARAVA.

A most suitable message! I will take care to deliver it
correctly.

KANWA.

And, now, my child, a few words of advice for thee. We hermits,
though we live secluded from the world are not ignorant of
worldly matters.

[S']ÁRNGARAVA.

No, indeed. Wise men are conversant with all subjects.

KANWA.

Listen, then, my daughter. When thou reachest thy husband's
palace, and art admitted into his family,

  Honour thy betters; ever be respectful
  To those above thee; and, should others share
  Thy husband's love, ne'er yield thyself a prey
  to jealousy; but ever be a friend,
  A loving friend, to those who rival thee
  In his affections. Should thy wedded lord
  Treat thee with harshness, thou most never be
  Harsh in return, but patient and submissive;
  Be to thy menials courteous, and to all
  Placed under thee, considerate and kind;
  Be never self-indulgent, but avoid
  Excess in pleasure; and, when fortune smiles,
  Be not puffed up. Thus to thy husband's house
  Wilt thou a blessing prove, and not a curse.

What thinks Gautamí of this advice?

GAUTAMÍ.

An excellent compendium, truly, of every wife's duties! Lay it
well to heart, my daughter.

KANWA.

Come, my beloved child, one parting embrace for me and for thy
companions, and then we leave thee.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.

My father, must Priyamvadá and Anasúyá really return with you?
They are very dear to me.

KANWA.

Yes, my child; they, too, in good time, will be given in marriage
to suitable husbands. It would not be proper for them to
accompany thee to such a public place. But Gautamí shall be thy
companion.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.                                    [_Embracing him_.

Removed from thy bosom, my beloved father, like a young
tendril of the sandal-tree torn from its home in the western
mountains[71], how shall I be able to support life in a foreign
soil?

KANWA.

Daughter, thy fears are groundless.

  Soon shall thy lord prefer thee to the rank
  Of his own consort; and unnumbered cares
  Befitting his imperial dignity
  Shall constantly engross thee. Then the bliss
  Of bearing him a son--a noble boy,
  Bright as the day-star, shall transport thy soul
  With new delights, and little shalt thou reck
  Of the light sorrow that afflicts thee now
  At parting from thy father and thy friends.

       [[S']AKOONTALÁ _throws herself at her foster-father's feet_.

KANWA.

Blessings on thee, my child! May all my hopes of thee be
realized!

[S']AKOONTALÁ                           [_Approaching her friends_.

Come, my two loved companions, embrace me both of you together.

PRIYAMVADÁ AND ANASÚYÁ.                         [_Embracing her_.

Dear [S']akoontalá, remember, if the King should by any chance be
slow in recognizing you, you have only to show him this ring, on
which his own name is engraved.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.

The bare thought of it puts me in a tremor.

PRIYAMVADÁ AND ANASÚYÁ.

There is no real cause for fear, dearest. Excessive affection is
too apt to suspect evil where none exists.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.

Come, lady, we must hasten on. The sun is rising in the heavens.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.                    [_Looking towards the hermitage_.

Dear father, when shall I ever see this hallowed grove again?

KANWA.

I will tell thee; listen:--

  When thou hast passed a long and blissful life
  As King Dushyanta's queen, and jointly shared
  With all the earth his ever-watchful care;
  And hast beheld thine own heroic son,
  Matchless in arms, united to a bride
  In happy wedlock; when his aged sire,
  Thy faithful husband, hath to him resigned
  The helm of state; then, weary of the world,
  Together with Dushyanta thou shalt seek
  The calm seclusion of thy former home[72];
  There amid holy scenes to be at peace,
  Till thy puree very similar.

  As one just bathed beholds the man polluted;
  As one late purified, the yet impure;
  As one awake looks on the yet unawakened;
  Or as the freeman gazes on the thrall,
  So I regard this crowd of pleasure-seekers.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.

  [_Feeling a quivering sensation in her right eyelid_ [79]_, and
                                          suspecting a bad omen_.

Alas! what means this throbbing of my right eyelid?

GAUTAMÍ.

Heaven avert the evil omen, my child! May the guardian deities of
thy husband's family convert it into a sign of good fortune!

[_Walks on_.

PRIEST.

[_Pointing to the King_.

Most reverend Sirs, there stands the protector of the four
classes of the people; the guardian of the four conditions of the
priesthood[80]. He has just left the judgment-seat, and is
waiting for you. Behold him!

[S']ÁRNGARAVA

Great Bráhman, we are happy in thinking that the King's power is
exerted for the protection of all classes of his subjects. We
have not come as petitioners--we have the fullest confidence in
the generosity of his nature.

  The loftiest trees bend humbly to the ground
  Beneath the teeming burden of their fruit;
  High in the vernal sky the pregnant clouds
  Suspend their stately course, and, hanging low,
  Scatter their sparkling treasures o'er the earth;
  And such is true benevolence; the good
  Are never rendered arrogant by riches.

 WARDER.

So please your Majesty, I judge from the placid countenance of
the hermits that they have no alarming message to deliver.

KING.                                  [_Looking at [S']AKOONTALÁ_.

But the lady there--

  Who can she be, whose form of matchless grace
  Is half concealed beneath her flowing veil?
  Among the sombre hermits she appears
  Like a fresh bud 'mid sear and yellow leaves.

WARDER.

So please your Majesty, my curiosity is also roused, but no
conjecture occurs to my mind. This at least is certain, that she
deserves to be looked at more closely.

KING.

True; but it is not right to gaze at another man's wife[120].

[S']AKOONTALÁ.             [_Placing her hand on her bosom. Aside_.

O my heart, why this throbbing? Remember thy lord's affection,
and take courage.

PRIEST.                                             [_Advancing_.

These holy men have been received with all due honour. One of
them has now a message to deliver from his spiritual superior.
Will your Majesty deign to hear it?

KING.

I am all attention.

HERMITS.                                [_Extending their hands_.

Victory to the King!

KING.

Accept my respectful greeting.

HERMITS.

May the desires of your soul be accomplished!

KING.

I trust no one is molesting you in the prosecution of your
religious rites.

HERMITS.

  Who dares disturb our penitential rites
  When thou art our protector? Can the night
  Prevail to cast her shadows o'er the earth
  While the sun's beams irradiate the sky?

KING.

Such, indeed, is the very meaning of my title--'Defender of the
Just.' I trust the venerable Kanwa is in good health. The world
is interested in his well-being.

HERMITS.

Holy men have health and prosperity in their own power. He bade
us greet your Majesty, and, after kind inquiries, deliver this
message.

KING.

Let me hear his commands.

[S']ÁRNGARAVA.

He bade us say that he feels happy in giving his sanction to the
marriage which your Majesty contracted with this lady, his
daughter, privately and by mutual agreement. Because,

  By us thou art esteemed the most illustrious
  Of noble husbands; and [S']akoontalá,
  Virtue herself in human form revealed.
  Great Brahmá hath in equal yoke united
  A bride unto a husband worthy of her;
  Henceforth let none make blasphemous complaint
  That he is pleased with ill-assorted unions[81].

Since, therefore, she expects soon to be the mother of thy child,
receive her into thy palace, that she may perform, in conjunction
with thee, the ceremonies prescribed by religion on such an
occasion.

GAUTAMÍ.

So please your Majesty, I would add a few words; but why should
I intrude my sentiments when an opportunity of speaking my mind
has never been allowed me?

  She took no counsel with her kindred; thou
  Didst not confer with thine, but all alone
  Didst solemnize thy nuptials with thy wife.
  Together, then, hold converse; let us leave you.

[S']AKOONTALÁ                                             [_Aside_.

Ah! how I tremble for my lord's reply.

KING.

What strange proposal is this?

[S']AKOONTALÁ                                             [_Aside_.

His words are like fire to me.

[S']ÁRNGARAVA

What do I hear? Dost thou, then, hesitate? Monarch, thou art well
acquainted with the ways of the world, and knowest that

  A wife, however virtuous and discreet,
  If she live separate from her wedded lord,
  Though under shelter of her parent's roof,
  Is marked for vile suspicion. Let her dwell
  Beside her husband, though he hold her not
  In his affection. So her kinsmen will it.

KING.

Do you really mean to assert that I ever married
this lady?

[S']AKOONTALÁ.                              [_Despondingly. Aside_.

O my heart, thy worst misgivings are confirmed.

[S']ÁRNGARAVA.

Is it becoming in a monarch to depart from the rules of justice,
because he repents of his engagements?

KING.

I cannot answer a question which is based on a mere fabrication.

[S']ÁRNGARAVA.

Such inconstancy is fortunately not common, except in men
intoxicated by power.

KING.

Is that remark aimed at me?

GAUTAMÍ.

Be not ashamed, my daughter. Let me remove thy veil for a little
space. Thy husband will then recognize thee.

                                             [_Removes her veil_.

KING.

                               [_Gazing at_ [S']AKOONTALÁ. _Aside_.

  What charms are here revealed before mine eyes!
  Truly no blemish mars the symmetry
  Of that fair form; yet can I ne'er believe
  She is my wedded wife; and like a bee
  That circles round the flower whose nectared cup
  Teems with the dew of morning, I must pause
  Ere eagerly I taste the proffered sweetness.

                                   [_Remains wrapped in thought_.

WARDER.

How admirably does our royal master's behaviour prove his regard
for justice! Who else would hesitate for a moment when good
fortune offered for his acceptance a form of such rare beauty?

[S']ÁRNGARAVA.

Great King, why art thou silent?

KING.

Holy men, I have revolved the matter in my mind; but the more I
think of it, the less able am I to recollect that I ever
contracted an alliance with this lady. What answer, then, can I
possibly give you when I do not believe myself to be her husband,
and I plainly see that she is soon to become a mother?

[S']AKOONTALÁ

[_Aside_.

Woe! woe! Is our very marriage to be called in question by my own
husband? Ah me! is this to be the end of all my bright visions of
wedded happiness?

[S']ÁRNGARAVA.

Beware!

  Beware how thou insult the holy Sage!
  Remember how he generously allowed
  Thy secret union with his foster-child;
  And how, when thou didst rob him of his treasure,
  He sought to furnish thee excuse, when rather
  He should have cursed thee for a ravisher.

[S']ÁRADWATA.

[S']árngarava, speak to him no more. [S']akoontalá,
our part is performed; we have said all we have to
say, and the King has replied in the manner thou
hast heard. It is now thy turn to give him convincing
evidence of thy marriage.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.                                            [_Aside_.

Since his feeling towards me has undergone a complete revolution,
what will it avail to revive old recollections? One thing is
clear--I shall soon have to mourn my own widowhood.

[_Aloud_.]

My revered husband--

[_Stops short_.]

But no--I dare not address thee by this title, since thou hast
refused to acknowledge our union. Noble descendant of Puru! It is
not worthy of thee to betray an innocent-minded girl, and disown
her in such terms, after having so lately and so solemnly
plighted thy vows to her in the hermitage.

KING.

[_Stopping his ears_.

I will hear no more. Be such a crime far from my thoughts!

  What evil spirit can possess thee, lady,
  That thou dost seek to sully my good name
  By base aspersions, like a swollen torrent,
  That, leaping from its narrow bed, o'erthrows
  The tree upon its bank, and strives to blend
  Its turbid waters with the crystal stream?

[S']AKOONTALÁ.

If, then, thou really believest me to be the wife of another, and
thy present conduct proceeds from some cloud that obscures thy
recollection, I will easily convince thee by this token.

KING.

An excellent idea!

[S']AKOONTALÁ.

[_Feeling for the ring_.

Alas! alas! woe is me! There is no ring on my finger!

                                [_Looks with anguish at_ GAUTAMÍ.

GAUTAMÍ.

The ring must have slipped off when thou wast in the act of
offering homage to the holy water of [S']achí's sacred pool, near
Sakrávatára[82].

KING.                                                 [_Smiling_.

People may well talk of the readiness of woman's invention! Here
is an instance of it.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.

Say, rather, of the omnipotence of fate. I will mention another
circumstance, which may yet convince thee.

KING.

By all means let me hear it at once.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.

One day, while we were seated in a jasmine-bower, thou didst pour
into the hollow of thine hand some water, sprinkled by a recent
shower in the cup of a lotus-blossom--

KING.

I am listening; proceed.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.

At that instant, my adopted child, the little fawn, with soft,
long eyes, came running towards us. Upon which, before tasting
the water thyself, thou didst kindly offer some to the little
creature, saying fondly:--'Drink first, gentle fawn.' But she
could not be induced to drink from the hand of a stranger; though
immediately afterwards, when I took the water in my own hand,
she drank with perfect confidence. Then, with a smile, thou didst
say;--'Every creature confides naturale account of how the ring came into my possession.

SUPERINTENDENT.                      [_To one of the_ CONSTABLES.

Well, Jánuka, the rascal emits such a fishy odour that I have no
doubt of his being a fisherman; but we must inquire a little more
closely into this queer story about the finding of the ring.
Come, we'll take him before the King's household.

BOTH CONSTABLES.

Very good, master. Get on with you, you cutpurse.

                                                  [_All move on_.

SUPERINTENDENT.

Now attend, Súchaka; keep your guard here at the gate; and hark
ye, sirrahs, take good care your prisoner does not escape, while
I go in and lay the whole story of the discovery of this ring
before the King in person. I will soon return and let you know
his commands.

BOTH CONSTABLES.

Go in, master, by all means; and may you find favour in the
King's sight.

[_Exit_ SUPERINTENDENT.  FIRST CONSTABLE.

                                            [_After an interval_.

I say, Jánuka, the Superintendent is a long time away.

SECOND CONSTABLE.

Aye, aye; kings are not to be got at so easily. Folks must bide
the proper opportunity.

FIRST CONSTABLE.

Jánuka, my fingers itch to strike the first blow at this royal
victim here. We must kill him with all the honours, you know. I
long to begin binding the flowers round his head[88].

                   [_Pretends to strike a blow at the_ FISHERMAN.

FISHERMAN.

Your Honour surely will not put an innocent man to a cruel death.

SECOND CONSTABLE.

There's our Superintendent at last, I declare. See! he is coming
towards us with a paper in his hand. We shall soon know the
King's command; so prepare, my fine fellow, either to become food
for the vultures, or to make acquaintance with some hungry cur.

SUPERINTENDENT.

                                                     [_Entering_.

Ho, there, Súchaka! set the fisherman at liberty, I tell you. His
story about the ring is all correct.  SÚCHAKA.

Oh! very good, Sir; as you please.

SECOND CONSTABLE.

The fellow had one foot in hell, and now here he is in the land
of the living.

                                                 [_Releases him_.

FISHERMAN.

                                 [_Bowing to the_ SUPERINTENDENT.

Now, master, what think you of my way of getting a livelihood?

SUPERINTENDENT.

Here, my good man, the King desired me to present you with this
purse. It contains a sum of money equal to the full value of the
ring.

                                          [_Gives him the money_.

FISHERMAN.

                                         [_Taking it and bowing_.

His Majesty does me too great honour.

SÚCHAKA.

You may well say so. He might as well have taken you from the
gallows to seat you on his state elephant.

JÁNUKA.

Master, the King must value the ring very highly, or he would
never have sent such a sum of money to this ragamuffin.

SUPERINTENDENT.

I don't think he prizes it as a costly jewel so much as a
memorial of some person he tenderly loves. The moment it was
shown to him he became much agitated, though in general he
conceals his feelings.  SÚCHAKA.

Then you must have done a great service--

JÁNUKA.

Yes, to this husband of a fish-wife.

                             [_Looks enviously at the_ FISHERMAN.

FISHERMAN.

Here's half the money for you, my masters. It will serve to
purchase the flowers you spoke of, if not to buy me your
good-will.

JÁNUKA.

Well, now, that's just as it should be.

SUPERINTENDENT.

My good fisherman, you are an excellent fellow, and I begin to
feel quite a regard for you. Let us seal our first friendship
over a glass of good liquor. Come along to the next wine-shop,
and we'll drink your health.

ALL.

By all means.

                                                       [_Exeunt_.

       *       *       *       *       *




ACT VI.

SCENE.--_The Garden of a Palace.

The nymph_ SÁNUMATÍ _is seen descending in a celestial car_.

SÁNUMATÍ.

Behold me just arrived from attending in my proper turn at the
nymph's pool, where I have left the other nymphs to perform their
ablutions, whilst I seek to ascertain, with my own eyes, how it
fares with King Dushyanta. My connexion with the nymph Menaká has
made her daughter [S']akoontalá dearer to me than my own flesh and
blood; and Menaká it was who charged me with this errand on her
daughter's behalf.

[_Looking round in all directions_.]

How is it that I see no preparations in the King's household for
celebrating the great vernal festival[89]? I could easily
discover the reason by my divine faculty of meditation[134]; but
respect must be shown to the wishes of my friend. How then shall
I arrive at the truth? I know what I will do. I will become
invisible, and place myself near those two maidens who are
tending the plants in the garden.

                               [_Descends and takes her station_.

_Enter a_ MAIDEN, _who stops in front of a mango-tree, and gazes
at the blossom. Another_ MAIDEN _is seen behind her_.

FIRST MAIDEN.

Hail to thee, lovely harbinger of spring! The varied radiance of
thy opening flowers Is welcome to my sight. I bid thee hail,
Sweet mango, soul of this enchanting season.

SECOND MAIDEN.

Parabhritiká, what are you saying there to yourself?

FIRST MAIDEN.

Dear Madhukariká, am I not named after the Koïl[90]? and does not
the Koïl sing for joy at the first appearance of the mango-blossom?

SECOND MAIDEN.            [_Approaching hastily, with transport_.

What! is spring really come?

FIRST MAIDEN.

Yes, indeed, Madhukariká, and with it the season of joy, love,
and song.

SECOND MAIDEN.

Let me lean upon you, dear, while I stead on tiptoe and pluck a
blossom, of the mango, that I may present it as an offering to
the god of love.

FIRST MAIDEN.

Provided you let me have half the reward which the god will
bestow in return.

SECOND MAIDEN.

To be sure you shall, and that without asking. Are we not one in
heart and soul, though divided in body?

[_Leans on her friend and plucks a mango-blossom_.]

Ah! here is a bud just bursting into flower. It diffuses a
delicious perfume, though not yet quite expanded.

[_Joining her hands reverentially_.]

  God of the bow, who with spring's choicest flowers
  Dost point thy five unerring shafts[91]; to thee
  I dedicate this blossom; let it serve
  To barb thy truest arrow; be its mark
  Some youthful heart that pines to be beloved.

                                  [_Throws down a mango-blossom_.

CHAMBERLAIN.

                        [_Entering in a hurried manner, angrily_.

Hold there, thoughtless woman. What are you about, breaking off
those mango-blossoms, when the King has forbidden the celebration
of the spring festival?

BOTH MAIDENS.                                         [_Alarmed_.

Pardon us, kind Sir, we have heard nothing of it.

CHAMBERLAIN.

You have heard nothing of it? Why, all the vernal plants and
shrubs, and the very birds that lodge in their branches, show
more respect to the King's order than you do.

  Yon mango-blossoms, though long since expanded,
  Gather no down upon their tender crests;
  The flower still lingers in the amaranth[92],
  Imprisoned in its bud; the tuneful Koïl,
  Though winter's chilly dews be overpast,
  Suspends the liquid volume of his song
  Scarce uttered in his throat; e'en Love, dismayed,
  Restores the half-drawn arrow to his quiver.

BOTH MAIDENS.

The mighty power of King Dushyanta is not to be disputed.

FIRST MAIDEN.

It is but a few days since Mitrávasu, the King's brother-in-law,
sent us to wait upon his Majesty; and, during the whole of our
sojourn here, we have been entrusted with the charge of the royal
pleasure-grounds. We are therefore strangers in this place, and
heard nothing of the order till you informed us of it.

CHAMBERLAIN.

Well then, now you know it, take care you don't continue your
preparations.

BOTH MAIDENS.

But tell us, kind Sir, why has the King prohibited the usual
festivities? We are curious to hear, if we may.

SÁNUMATÍ.                                              [_Aside_.

Men are naturally fond of festive entertainments. There must be
some good reason for the prohibition.

CHAMBERLAIN.

The whole affair is now public; why should I not speak of it?
Has not the gossip about the King's rejection of [S']akoontalá
reached your ears yet?

BOTH MAIDENS.

Oh yes, we heard the story from the King's brother-in-law, as
far, at least, as the discovery of the ring.

CHAMBERLAIN.

Then there is little more to tell you. As soon as the King's
memory was restored by the sight of his own ring, he exclaimed:
'Yes, it is all true. I remember now my secret marriage with
[S']akoontalá. When I repudiated her, I had lost my recollection!'
Ever since that moment, he has yielded himself a prey to the
bitterest remorse.

  He loathes his former pleasures; he rejects
  The daily homage of his ministers;
  On his lone couch he tosses to and fro,
  Courting repose in vain. Whene'er he meets
  The ladies of his palace, and would fain
  Address them with politeness, he confounds
  Their names; or, calling them '[S']akoontalá,'
  Is straightway silent and abashed with shame.

SÁNUMATÍ.                                               [_Aside_.

To me this account is delightful.

CHAMBERLAIN.

In short, the King is so completely out of his mind that the
festival has been prohibited.

BOTH MAIDENS.

Perfectly right.

A VOICE BEHIND THE SCENES.

The King! the King! This way, Sire, this way.

CHAMBERLAIN.                                        [_Listening_.

Oh! here comes his Majesty in this direction. Pass on, maidens;
attend to your duties.

BOTH MAIDENS.

We will, sir.

                                                       [_Exeunt_.

_Enter King_ DUSHYANTA, _dressed in deep mourning, attended his
Jester_, MÁ[T.]HAVYA, _and preceded by_ VETRAVATÍ.

CHAMBERLAIN.                               [_Gazing at the_ KING.

Well, noble forms are certainly pleasing, under all varieti endowed
  With reason, yet rejected her I loved.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.                                              [_Aside_.

And so, I suppose, I must stand here to be devoured by hunger,
whilst he goes on in this sentimental strain.

KING.

O forsaken one, unjustly banished from my presence, take pity on
thy slave, whose heart is consumed by the fire of remorse, and
return to my sight.

_Enter_ CHATURIKÁ _hurriedly, with a picture in her hand_.

CHATURIKÁ.

Here is the Queen's portrait.

                                            [_Shows the picture_.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

Excellent, my dear friend, excellent! The imitation of nature is
perfect, and the attitude of the figures is really charming. They
stand out in such bold relief that the eye is quite deceived.

SÁNUMATÍ.                                               [_Aside_.

A most artistic performance! I admire the King's skill, and could
almost believe that [S']akoontalá herself was before me.

KING.

  I own 'tis not amiss, though it portrays
  But feebly her angelic loveliness.
  Aught less than perfect is depicted falsely,
  And fancy must supply the imperfection.

SÁNUMATÍ.                                               [_Aside_.

A very just remark from a modest man, whose affection is
exaggerated by the keenness of his remorse.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

Tell me:--I see three female figures drawn on the canvas, and all
of them beautiful; which of the three is her Majesty [S']akoontalá?

SÁNUMATÍ.                                               [_Aside_.

If he cannot distinguish her from the others, the simpleton might
as well have no eyes in his head.

KING.

Which should you imagine to be intended for her?

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

She who is leaning, apparently a little tired, against the stem
of that mango-tree, the tender leaves of which glitter with the
water she has poured upon them. Her arms are gracefully extended;
her face is somewhat flushed with the heat; and a few flowers
have escaped from her hair, which has become unfastened, and hangs
in loose tresses about her neck. That must be the queen
[S']akoontalá, and the others, I presume, are her two attendants.

KING.

I congratulate you on your discernment. Behold the proof of my
passion;

  My finger, burning with the glow of love[93],
  Has left its impress on the painted tablet;
  While here and there, alas! a scalding tear
  Has fallen on the cheek and dimmed its brightness.

Chaturiká, the garden in the background of the picture is only
half-painted. Go, fetch the brush that I may finish it.

CHATURIKÁ.

Worthy Má[t.]havya, have the kindness to hold the picture until I
return.

KING.

Nay, I will hold it myself.

                                            [_Takes the picture_.

                                               [_Exit_ CHATURIKÁ.

  My loved one came but lately to my presence
  And offered me herself, but in my folly
  I spurned the gift, and now I fondly cling
  To her mere image; even as a madman
  Would pass the waters of the gushing stream,
  And thirst for airy vapours of the desert[94].

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.                                             [_Aside_.

He has been fool enough to forego the reality for the semblance,
the substance for the shadow.

[_Aloud_.]

Tell us, I pray, what else remains to be painted.

SÁNUMATÍ.                                               [_Aside_.

He longs, no doubt, to delineate some favourite spot where my
[S']akoontalá delighted to ramble.

KING.

You shall hear:--

  I wish to see the Máliní portrayed,
  Its tranquil course by banks of sand impeded;
  Upon the brink a pair of swans; beyond,
  The hills adjacent to Himálaya[95],
  Studded with deer; and, near the spreading shade
  Of some large tree, where 'mid the branches hang
  The hermits' vests of bark, a tender doe,
  Rubbing its downy forehead on the horn
  Of a black antelope, should be depicted.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

                                                        [_Aside_.

Pooh! if I were he, I would fill up the vacant
spaces with a lot of grizzly-bearded old hermits.

KING.

My dear Má[T.]Havya, there is still a part of [S']akoontalá's
dress which I purposed to draw, but find I have
omitted.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

What is that?

SÁNUMATÍ.                                              [_Aside_.

Something suitable, I suppose, to the simple attire of a young
and beautiful girl dwelling in a forest.

KING.

  A sweet [S']irísha blossom should be twined
  Behind her ear[7], its perfumed crest depending
  Towards her cheek; and, resting on her bosom,
  A lotus-fibre necklace, soft and bright
  As an autumnal moonbeam, should be traced.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

Pray, why does the Queen cover her lips with the tips of her
fingers, bright as the blossom of a lily, as if she were afraid
of something? [_Looking more closely_.] Oh! I see; a vagabond
bee, intent on thieving honey from the flowers, has mistaken her
mouth for a rosebud, and is trying to settle upon it.

KING.

A bee! drive off the impudent insect, will you?

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

That's your business. Your royal prerogative gives you power over
all offenders.

KING.

Very true. Listen to me, thou favourite guest of flowering plants;
why give thyself the trouble of hovering here?

  See where thy partner sits on yonder flower,
  And waits for thee ere she will sip its dew.

SÁNUMATÍ.                                               [_Aside_.

A most polite way of warning him off!

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

You'll find the obstinate creature is not to be sent about his
business so easily as you think.

KING.

Dost thou presume to disobey? Now hear me:--

  An thou but touch the lips of my beloved,
  Sweet as the opening blossom, whence I quaffed
  In happier days love's nectar, I will place thee
  Within the hollow of yon lotus cup,
  And there imprison thee for thy presumption.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

He must be bold indeed not to show any fear when you threaten him
with such an awful punishment. [_Smiling, aside_.] He is stark mad,
that's clear; and I believe, by keeping him company, I am beginning
to talk almost as wildly. [_Aloud_.] Look, it is only a painted bee.

KING.

Painted? impossible!

SÁNUMATÍ.                                               [_Aside_.

Even I did not perceive it; how much less should he!

KING.

Oh! my dear friend, why were you so ill-natured as to tell me the
truth?

  While all entranced, I gazed upon her picture,
  My loved one seemed to live before my eyes
  Till every fibre of my being thrilled
  With rapturous emotion. Oh! 'twas cruel
  To dissipate the day-dream, and transform
  The blissful vision to a lifeless image.

                                                  [_Sheds tears_.

SÁNUMATÍ.                                               [_Aside_.

Separated lovers are very difficult to please; but he seems more
difficult than usual.

KING.

Alas! my dear Má[T.]Havya, why am I doomed to be the victim of
perpetual disappointment?

  Vain is the hope of meeting her in dreams,
  For slumber night by night forsakes my couch;
  And now that I would fain assuage my grief
  By gazing on her portrait here before me,
  Tears of despairing love obscure my sight.

SÁNUMATÍ.                                               [_Aside_.

You have made ample amends for the wrong you did [S']akoontalá in
disowning her.

CHATURIKÁ.                                           [_Entering_.

Victory to the King! I was coming along with the box of colours
in my hand--

KING.

What now?

CHATURIKÁ.

When I met the queen Vasumatí, attended by Taraliká. She insisted
on taking it from me, and declared she would herself deliver it
into your Majesty's hands.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

By what luck did you contrive to escape her?

CHATURIKÁ.

While her maid was disengaging her mantle, which had caught in
the branch, of a shrub, I ran away.

KING.

Here, my good friend, take the picture and conceal it. My
attentions to the Queen have made her presumptuous. She will be
here in a minute.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

Conceal the picture! conceal myself, you mean.

[_Getting up and taking the picture_.]

The Queen has a bitter draught in store for you, which you will
have to swallow, as [S']iva did the poison at the Deluge[96]. When
you are well quit of her, you may send and call me from the
Palace of Clouds[97], where I shall take refuge.

                                                [_Exit, running_.

SÁNUMATÍ.                                               [_Aside_.

Although the King's affections are transferred to another object,
yet he respects his previous attachments. I fear his love must be
somewhat fickle.

VETRAVATÍ.               [_Entering with a despatch in her hand_.

Victory to the King!

KING.

Vetravatí, did you observe the queen Vasumatí coming in this
direction?

VETRAVATÍ.

I did; but when she saw that I had a despatch in my hand for your
Majesty, she turned back.

KING.

The Queen has too much regard for propriety to interrupt me when
I am engaged with State-affairs.

VETRAVATÍ.

So please your Majesty, your prime minister begs respectfully to
inform you that he has devoted much time to the settlement of
financial calculations, and only one case of importance has been
submitted by the citizens for his consideration. He has made a
written report of the facts, and requests your Majesty to cast
your eyes over it.

KING.

Hand me the paper.

                                        [_VETRAVATÍ delivers it_.

[_Reading_.

What have we here? 'A merchant named Dhanamitra, trading by sea,
was lost in a late shipwreck. Though a wealthy trader, he was
childless; and the whole of his immense property becomes by law
forfeited to the king.' So writes the minister. Alas! alas! for
his childlessness! But surely, if he was wealthy, he must have
had many wives. Let an inquiry be made whether any one of them is
expecting to give birth to a child.

VETRAVATÍ.

They say that his wife, the daughter of the foreman of a guild
belonging to Ayodhyá [98], has just compleing shafts (as erst
  The Lion-man's terrific claws[108]) have purged
  The empyreal sphere from taint of demons foul.

KING.

The praise of my victory must be ascribed to the majesty of
Indra.

  When mighty gods make men their delegates
  In martial enterprise, to them belongs
  The palm of victory; and not to mortals.
  Could the pale Dawn dispel the shades of night,
  Did not the god of day, whose diadem
  Is jewelled with a thousand beams of light,
  Place him in front of his effulgent car[11]?

MÁTALI.

A very just comparison!

[_Driving on_.]

Great King, behold! the glory of thy fame has reached even to the
vault of heaven.

  Hark! yonder inmates of the starry sphere
  Sing anthems worthy of thy martial deeds,
  While with celestial colours they depict
  The story of thy victories on scrolls
  Formed of the leaves of heaven's immortal trees.

KING.

My good Mátali, yesterday, when I ascended the sky, I was so
eager to do battle with the demons, that the road by which we
were travelling towards Indra's heaven escaped my observation.
Tell me, in which path of the seven winds are we now moving?

MÁTALI.

  We journey in the path of Parivaha[109]--
  The wind that bears along the triple Ganges[110]
  And causes Ursa's seven stars to roll
  In their appointed orbits, scattering
  Their several rays with equal distribution.
  'Tis the same path that once was sanctified
  By the divine impression of the foot
  Of Vishnu, when, to conquer haughty Bali,
  He spanned the heavens in his second stride[111].

KING.

This is the reason, I suppose, that a sensation of calm repose
pervades all my senses.

[_Looking down at the wheels_.]

Ah! Mátali, we are descending towards the earth's atmosphere.

MÁTALI.

What makes you think so?

KING.

The car itself instructs me; we are moving
O'er pregnant clouds, surcharged with rain; below us
I see the moisture-loving Chátakas[112]
In sportive flight dart through the spokes; the steeds
Of Indra glisten with the lightning's flash;
And a thick mist bedews the circling wheels.

MÁTALI.

You are right; in a little while the chariot will touch the
ground, and you will be in your own dominions.

KING.                                            [_Looking down_.

How wonderful the appearance of the earth as we rapidly descend!

  Stupendous prospect! yonder lofty hills
  Do suddenly uprear their towering heads
  Amid the plain, while from beneath their crests
  The ground receding sinks; the trees, whose stem
  Seemed lately hid within their leafy tresses,
  Rise into elevation, and display
  Their branching shoulders; yonder streams, whose waters,
  Like silver threads, were scarce, but now, discerned,
  Grow into mighty rivers; lo! the earth
  Seems upward hurled by some gigantic power.

MÁTALI.

Well described!

                                            [_Looking with awe_.]

Grand, indeed, and lovely is the spectacle presented by the
earth.

KING.

Tell me, Mátali, what is the range of mountains which, like a
bank of clouds illumined by the setting sun, pours down a stream
of gold? On one side its base dips into the eastern ocean, and on
the other side into the western.

MÁTALI.

Great Prince, it is called 'Golden-peak[113],' and is the abode
of the attendants of the god of wealth. In this spot the highest
forms of penance are wrought out.

  There Ka[s']yapa[114], the great progenitor
  Of demons and of gods, himself the offspring
  Of the divine Maríchi, Brahmá's son,
  With Adití, his wife, in calm seclusion,
  Does holy penance for the good of mortals.

KING.

Then I must not neglect so good an opportunity of obtaining his
blessing. I should much like to visit this venerable personage
and offer him my homage.

MÁTALI.

By all means. An excellent idea!

                                  [_Guides the car to the earth_.

KING.                                      [_In a tone of wonder_.

How's this?

  Our chariot wheels move noiselessly. Around
  No clouds of dust arise; no shock betokened
  Our contact with the earth; we seem to glide
  Above the ground, so lightly do we touch it.

MÁTALI.

Such is the difference between the car of Indra and that of your
Majesty.

KING.

In which direction, Mátali, is Ka[s']yapa's sacred retreat?

MÁTALI.                                              [_Pointing_.

  Where stands yon anchorite, towards the orb
  Of the meridian sun, immovable
  As a tree's stem, his body half-concealed
  By a huge ant-hill. Bound about his breast
  No sacred cord is twined[115], but in its stead
  A hideous serpent's skin. In place of necklace,
  The tendrils of a withered creeper chafe
  His wasted neck. His matted hair depends
  In thick entanglement about his shoulders,
  And birds construct their nests within its folds[116].

KING.

I salute thee, thou man of austere devotion.

MÁTALI.                       [_Holding in the reins of the car_.

Great Prince, we are now in the sacred grove of the holy
Ka[s']yapa--the grove that boasts as its ornament one of the five
trees of Indra's heaven, reared by Adití.

KING.

This sacred retreat is more delightful than heaven itself. I
could almost fancy myself bathing in a pool of nectar.

MÁTALI.                                  [_Stopping the chariot_.

Descend, mighty Prince.

KING.                                              [_Descending_.

And what will you do, Mátali?

MÁTALI.

The chariot will remain where I have stopped it. We may both
descend.

[_Doing so_.]

This way, great King.

[_Walking on_.]

You see around you the celebrated region where the holiest sages
devote themselves to penitential rites.

KING.

I am filled with awe and wonder as I gaze.

  In such a place as this do saints of earth
  Long to complete their acts of penance; here,
  Beneath the shade of everlasting trees.
  Transplanted from the groves of Paradise,
  May they inhale the balmy air, and need
  No other nourishment[117]; here may they bathe
  In fountains sparkling with the golden dust
  Of lilies; here, on jewelled slabs of marble,
  In meditation rapt, may they recline;
  Here, in the presence of celestial nymphs,
  E'en passion's voice is powerless to move them.

MÁTALI.

So true is it that the aspirations of the good and great are ever
soaring upwards.

[_Turning round and speaking off the stage_.]

Tell me, Vriddha-[S']ákalya, how is the divine son of Maríchi now
engaged? What sayest thou? that he is conversing with Adití and
some of the wives of the great sages, and that they are
questioning him respecting the duties of a faithful wife?

KING.                                               [_Listening_.

Then we must await the holy father's leisure.

MÁTALI.                                   [_Looking at the_ KING.

If your Majesty will rest under the shade, at the foot of this
A[s']oka-tree [118], I will seek an opportunity of announcing your
arrival to Indra's reputed father.

KING.

As you think proper.

                                       [_Remains under the tree_.

MÁTALI.

Great King, I go.                                        [_Exit_.

KING.                                   [_Feeling his arm throb_.

  Wherefore this causeless throbbing, O mine arm[18]?
  All hope has fled for ever; mock me not
  With presages of good, when happiness
  Is lost, and nought but misery remains.

A VOICE BEHIND THE SCENES.

Be not so naughty. Do you begin already to show a refractory
spirit?

KING.                                               [_Listening_.

This is no place for petulance. Who can it be whose behaviour
calls for such a rebuke?

[_Looking in the direction of the sound and smiling_.]

A child, is it? closely attended by two holy women. His
disposition seems anything but child-like. See!

  He braves the fury of yon lioness
  Suckling its savage offspring, and compels
  The angry whelp to leave the half-sucked dug,
  Tearing its tender mane in boisterous sport.

_Enter a_ CHILD, _attended by_ TWO WOMEN _of the hermitage, in
the manner described_.

CHILD.

Open your mouth, my young lion, I want to count your teeth.

FIRST ATTENDANT.

You naughty child, why do you tease the animals? Know you not
that we cherish them in this hermitage as if they were our own
children? In good sooth, you have a high spirit of your own, and
are beginning already to do justice to the name Sarva-damana
('All-taming'), given you by the hermits.

KING.

Strange! My heart inclines towards the boy with almost as much
affection as if he were my own child. What can be the reason? I
suppose my own childlessness makes me yearn towards the sons of
others.

SECOND ATTENDANT.

This lioness will certainly attack you if you do not release her
whelp.

CHILD.                                               [_Laughing_.

Oh! indeed! let her come. Much I fear her, to be sure!

                              [_Pouts his under-lip in defiance_.

KING.

  The germ of mighty courage lies concealed
  Within this noble infant, like a spark
  Beneath the fuel, waiting but a breath
  To fan the flame and raise a conflagration.

FIRST ATTENDANT.

Let the young lion go, like a dear child, and I will give you
something else to play with.

CHILD.

Where is it? Give it me first.

                                       [_Stretches out his hand_.

KING.                                     [_Looking at his hand_.

How's that? His hand exhibits one of those mystic marks[84] which
are the sure prognostic of universal empire. See! His fingers
stretched in eager expectation To grasp the wished-for toy, and
knit together By a close-woven web, in shape resemble A lotus
blossom, whose expanding petals The early dawn has only half
unfolded.

SECOND ATTENDANT.

We shall never pacify him by mere words, dear Suvratá. Be kind
enough to go to my cottage, and you will find there a plaything
belonging to Márkandeya, one of the hermit's children. It is a
peacock made of china-ware, painted in many colours. Bring it
here for the child.

FIRST ATTENDANT.

Very well.  Oh! let me, fair one, chase away the drop
  That still bedews the fringes of thine eye;
  And let me thus efface the memory
  Of every tear that stained thy velvet cheek,
  Unnoticed and unheeded by thy lord,
  When in his madness he rejected thee.

                                          [_Wipes away the tear_.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.

                         [_Seeing the signet-ring on his finger_.

Ah! my dear husband, is that the Lost Ring?

KING.

Yes; the moment I recovered it my memory was restored.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.

The ring was to blame in allowing itself to be lost at the very
time when I was anxious to convince my noble husband of the
reality of my marriage.

KING.

Receive it back, as the beautiful twining-plant receives again
its blossom in token of its reunion with the spring.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.

Nay; I can never more place confidence in it. Let my husband
retain it.

                                                 [_Enter_ MÁTALI.

MÁTALI.

I congratulate your Majesty. Happy are you in your reunion with
your wife; happy are you in beholding the face of your own son.

KING.

Yes, indeed. My heart's dearest wish has borne sweet fruit. But
tell me, Mátali, is this joyful event known to the great Indra?

MÁTALI.                                               [_Smiling_.

What is unknown to the gods? But come with me, noble Prince, the
divine Ka[s']yapa graciously permits thee to be presented to him.

KING.

[S']akoontalá, take our child and lead the way. We will together go
into the presence of the holy Sage.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.

I shrink from entering the august presence of the great Saint,
even with my husband at my side.

KING.

Nay; on such a joyous occasion it is highly proper. Come, come; I
entreat thee.

                                                  [_All advance_.

KA[S']YAPA _is discovered seated on a throne with his wife_ ADITI.

KA[S']YAPA.

                           [_Gazing at_ DUSHYANTA. _To his wife_.

O Adití,

  This is the mighty hero, King Dushyanta,
  Protector of the earth; who, at the head
  Of the celestial armies of thy son,
  Does battle with the enemies of heaven.
  Thanks to his bow, the thunderbolt of Indra
  Rests from its work, no more the minister
  Of death and desolation to the world,
  But a mere symbol of divinity.

ADITI.

He bears in his noble form all the marks of dignity.

MÁTALI.                                           [_To_ DUSHYANTA

Sire, the venerable progenitors of the celestials are gazing at
your Majesty with as much affection as if you were their son. You
may advance towards them.

KING.

  Are these, O Mátali, the holy pair,
  Offspring of Daksha and divine Maríchi,
  Children of Brahmá's sons[125], by sages deemed
  Sole fountain of celestial light, diffused
  Through twelve effulgent orbs [114]? Are these the pair
  From whom the ruler of the triple world [126],
  Sovereign of gods and lord of sacrifice,
  Sprang into being? That immortal pair
  Whom Vishnu, greater than the Self-existent [127],
  Chose for his parents, when, to save mankind,
  He took upon himself the shape of mortals?

MÁTALI.

Even so.

KING.                                     [_Prostrating himself_.

Most august of beings! Dushyanta, content to have fulfilled the
commands of your son Indra, offers you his adoration.

KA[S']YAPA.

My son, long may'st thou live, and happily may'st thou reign over
the earth!

ADITI.

My son, may'st thou ever be invincible in the field of battle!

[S']AKOONTALÁ.

I also prostrate myself before you, most adorable Beings, and my
child with me.

KA[S']YAPA.

My daughter,

  Thy lord resembles Indra, and thy child
  Is noble as Jayanta, Indra's son;
  I have no worthier blessing left for thee,
  May'st thou be faithful as the god's own wife!

ADITI.

My daughter, may'st thou be always the object of thy husband's
fondest love; and may thy son live long to be the joy of both his
parents! Be seated.

[_All sit down in the presence of KA[S']YAPA_.

KA[S']YAPA.                     [_Regarding each of them by turns_.

  Hail to the beautiful [S']akoontalá,
  Hail to her noble son, and hail to thee,
  Illustrious Prince--rare triple combination
  Of virtue, wealth, and energy united!

KING.

Most venerable Ka[s']yapa, by your favour all my desires were
accomplished even before I was admitted to your presence. Never
was mortal so honoured that his boon should be granted ere it was
solicited. Because--

  Bloom before fruit, the clouds before the rain,
  Cause first and then effect, in endless sequence,
  Is the unchanging law of constant nature;
  But, ere the blessing issued from thy lips,
  The wishes of my heart were all fulfilled.

MÁTALI.

It is thus that the great progenitors of the world confer
favours.

KING.

Most reverend Sage, this thy handmaid was married to me by the
Gándharva ceremony[55], and after a time was conducted to my
palace by her relations. Meanwhile a fatal delusion seized me; I
lost my memory and rejected her, thus committing a grievous
offence against the venerable Kanwa, who is of thy divine race.
Afterwards the sight of this ring restored my faculties, and
brought back to my mind all the circumstances of my union with
his daughter. But my conduct still seems to me incomprehensible;

  As foolish as the fancies of a man
  Who, when he sees an elephant, denies
  That 'tis an elephant; then afterwards,
  When its huge bulk moves onward, hesitates;
  Yet will not be convinced till it has passed
  For ever from his sight, and left behind
  No vestige of its presence save its footsteps.

KA[S']YAPA.

My son, cease to think thyself in fault. Even the delusion that
possessed thy mind was not brought about by any act of thine.
Listen to me.

KING.

I am attentive.

KA[S']YAPA.

Know that when the nymph Menaká, the mother of [S']akoontalá,
became aware of her daughter's anguish in consequence of the loss
of the ring at the nymph's pool, and of thy subsequent rejection
of her, she brought her and confided her to the care of Adití.
And I no sooner saw her than I ascertained by my divine faculty
of meditation[134], that thy repudiation of thy poor faithful
wife had been caused entirely by the curse of Durvásas--not by
thine own fault--and that the spell would terminate on the
discovery of the ring.

KING.                                   [_Drawing a deep breath_.

Oh! what a weight is taken off my mind, now that my character is
cleared of reproach.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.                                            [_Aside_.

Joy! joy! My revered husband did not, then, reject me without
good reason, though I have no recollection of the curse
pronounced upon me. But, in all probability, I unconsciously
brought it upon myself, when I was so distracted on being
separated from my husband soon after our marriage. For I now
remember that my two friends advised me not to fail to show the
ring in case he should have forgotten me.

KA[S']YAPA.

At last, my daughter, thou art happy, and hast gained thy heart's
desire. Indulge, then, no feeling of resentment against thy
consort. See, now,

  Though he repulsed thee, 'twas the sage's curse
  That clouded his remembrance; 'twas the curse
  That made thy tender husband harsh towards thee.
  Soon as the spell was broken, and his soul
  Delivered from its darkness, in a moment,
  Thou didst regain thine empire o'er his heart.
  So on the tarnished surface of a mirror
  No image is reflected, till the dust,
  That dimmed its wonted lustre, is removed.

KING.

Holy father, see here the hope of my royal race.

                                  [_Takes his child by the hand_.

KA[S']YAPA.


  Know that he, too, will become the monarch of the
  wholes earth. Observe,
  Soon, a resistless hero, shall he cross
  The trackless ocean, borne above the waves
  In an aërial car; and shall subdue
  The earth's seven sea-girt isles[128]. Now has he gained,
  As the brave tamer of the forest-beasts,
  The title Sarva-damana; but then
  Mankind shall hail him as King Bharata[129],
  And call him the supporter of the world.

KING.

We cannot but entertain the highest hopes of a child for whom
your Highness performed the natal rites.

ADITI.

My revered husband, should not the intelligence be conveyed to
Kanwa, that his daughter's wishes are fulfilled, and her
happiness complete? He is [S']akoontalá's foster-father. Menaká,
who is one of my attendants, is her mother, and dearly does she
love her daughter.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.                                            [_Aside_.

The venerable matron has given utterance to the very wish that
was in my mind.

KA[S']YAPA.

His penances have gained for him the faculty of omniscience, and
the whole scene is already present to his mind's eye.

KING.

Then most assuredly he cannot be very angry with me.

KA[S']YAPA.

Nevertheless, it becomes us to send him intelligence of this
happy event, and hear his reply. What ho there!

PUPIL.                                               [_Entering_.

Holy father, what are your commands?

KA[S']YAPA.

My good Gálava, delay not an instant, but hasten through the air
and convey to the venerable Kanwa, from me, the happy news that
the fatal spell has ceased, that Dushyanta's memory is restored,
that his daughter [S']akoontalá has a son, and that she is once
more tenderly acknowledged by her husband.

PUPIL.

Your Highness' commands shall be obeyed.

                                                         [_Exit_.

KA[S']YAPA.

And now, my dear son, take thy consort and thy child, re-ascend
the car of Indra, and return to thy imperial capital.

KING.

Most holy father, I obey.

KA[S']YAPA.

And accept this blessing--

  For countless ages may the god of gods,
  Lord of the atmosphere, by copious showers
  Secure abundant harvests to thy subjects;
  And thou by frequent offerings preserve
  The Thunderer's friendship. Thus, by interchange
  Of kindly actions may you both confer
  Unnumbered benefits on earth and heaven.

KING.

Holy fahem
ranked as one of the five great sacred rites, and no punishment
was thought too severe for one who violated them. If a guest
departed unhonoured from a house, his sins were to be transferred
to the householder, and all the merits of the householder were to
be transferred to him.

26. _Sapta-parna tree_.

A tree having seven leaves on a stalk (_Echites scholaris_).

27. _Vis']wámitra, whose family name is Kausika_.

In the Rámáyana, the great sage Vi[s']wámitra (both king and saint),
who raised himself by his austerities from the regal to the
Bráhmanical caste, is said to be the son of Gádhi, King of Kanúj,
grandson of Kusanátha, and great-grandson of Kusika or Kusa. On
his accession to the throne, in the room of his father Gádhi, in
the course of a tour through his dominions, he visited the
hermitage of the sage Vasishtha, where the Cow of Plenty, a cow
granting all desires, excited his cupidity. He offered the sage
untold treasures for the cow; but being refused, prepared to take
it by force. A long war ensued between the king and the sage
(symbolical of the struggles between the military and Bráhmanical
classes), which ended in the defeat of Vi[s']wámitra, whose vexation
was such, that he devoted himself to austerities, in the hope of
attaining the condition of a Bráhman. The Rámáyana recounts how,
by gradually increasing the rigour of his penance through
thousands of years, he successively earned the title of Royal
Sage, Sage, Great Sage, and Bráhman Sage. It was not till he had
gained this last title that Vasishtha consented to acknowledge
his equality with himself, and ratify his admission into the
Bráhmanical state. It was at the time of Vi[s']wámitra's advancement
to the rank of a Sage, and whilst he was still a Kshatriya, that
Indra, jealous of his increasing power, sent the nymph Menaká to
seduce him from his life of mortification and continence. The Rámáyana
records his surrender to this temptation, and relates that the nymph
was his companion in the hermitage for ten years, but does not allude
to the birth of [S']akoontalá during that period.

28. _The inferior gods, I am aware, are jealous_.

According to the Hindú system, Indra and the other inferior
deities were not the possessors of Swarga, or heaven, by
indefeasible right. They accordingly viewed with jealousy, and
even alarm, any extraordinary persistency by a human being in
acts of penance, as it raised him to a level with themselves;
and, if carried beyond a certain point, enabled him to dispossess
them of Paradise. Indra was therefore the enemy of excessive
self-mortification, and had in his service numerous nymphs who
were called his 'weapons,' and whose business it was to impede by
their seductions the devotion of holy men.

29. _Gautamí_.

The name of the matron or Superior of the female part of the
society of hermits. Every association of religious devotees seems
to have included a certain number of women, presided over by an
elderly and venerable matron, whose authority resembled that of
an abbess in a convent of nuns.

30. _Ku[s']a-grass_.

This grass was held sacred by the Hindús, and was abundantly
used in all their religions ceremonies. Its leaves are very long,
and taper to a sharp needle-like point, of which the extreme
acuteness was proverbial; whence the epithet applied to a clever
man, 'sharp as the point of Ku[s']a-grass.' Its botanical name is
_Poa cynosuroïdes_.

31. _Kuruvaka._

A species of Jhintí or Barleria, with purple flowers, and covered
with sharp prickles.

32. _The Jester_.

See an account of this character in the Introduction, p. xxxiv.

33. _We have nothing to eat but roast game_.

Indian game is often very dry and flavourless.

34. _Attended by the Yavana women_.

Who these women were has not been accurately ascertained. Yavana
is properly Arabia, but is also a name applied to Greece. The
Yavana women were therefore either natives of Arabia, or Greece,
and their business was to attend upon the king, and take charge
of his weapons, especially his bow and arrows. Professor H. H.
Wilson, in his translation of the Vikramorva[s']í, where the same
word occurs (Act V. p. 261), remarks that Tartarian or Bactrian
women may be intended.

35. _In the disc of crystal_.

That is, the sun-gem (_Súrya-kánta_, 'beloved by the sun'), a
shining stone resembling crystal. Professor Wilson calls it a
fabulous stone with fabulous properties, and mentions another
stone, the moon-gem (_chandra-kánta_). It may be gathered from
this passage that the sun-stone was a kind of glass lens, and
that the Hindús were not ignorant of the properties of this
instrument at the time when '[S']akoontalá' was written.

36. _Some fallen blossoms of the jasmine_.

The jasmine here intended was a kind of double jasmine with a
very delicious perfume, sometimes called 'Arabian jasmine'
(_Jasminum zambac_). It was a delicate plant, and, as a creeper,
would depend on some other tree for support. The Arka, or
sun-tree (Gigantic Asclepias: _Calotropis gigantea_), on the
other hand, was a large and vigorous shrub. Hence the former is
compared to [S']akoontalá, the latter to the sage Kanwa.

37.

                  _The mellowed fruit
  Of virtuous actions in some former birth_.

The doctrine of the transmigration of the soul from one body to
another is an essential dogma of the Hindú religion, and
connected with it is the belief in the power which every human
being possesses of laying up for himself a store of merit by good
deeds performed in the present and former births. Indeed the
condition of every person is supposed to derive its character of
happiness or misery, elevation or degradation, from the virtues
or vices of previous states of being. The consequences of actions
in a former birth are called _vipáka_; they may be either good
or bad, but are rarely unmixed with evil taint.

In the present comparison, however, they are described as pure
and unalloyed. With reference to the first four lines of this
stanza, compare Catullus, Carmen Nuptiale, verse 39.

  'Ut flos in septis secretus nascitur hortis,
  Ignotus pecori, nullo contusus aratro,
  Quem mulcent auræ, firmat sol, educat imber:
  Multi illuum pueri, multæ optavere puellæ:
  Idem quum tenui carptus defloruit ungui,
  Nulli illum pueri, nallæ optavere puellæ:
  Sic virgo, dum intacta manet,' etc.

38. _The sixth part of their grain_.

According to Manu, a king might take a sixth part of liquids,
flowers, roots, fruit, grass, etc.; but, even though dying with
want, he was not to receive any tax from a Bráhman learned in the
Vedas.

39. _A title only one degree removed from that of a Sage_.

Dushyanta was a Rájarshi; that is, a man of the military class
who had attained the rank of Royal Sage or Saint by the practice
of religious austerities. The title of Royal or Imperial Sage was
only one degree inferior to that of Sage. Compare note 27.

40. _Chanted by inspired bards_.

Or celestial minstrels, called Gandharvas. These beings were the
musicians of Indra's heaven, and their business was to amuse the
inhabitants of Swarga by singing the praises of gods, saints, or
heroes. Compare note 11.

41. _In their fierce warfare with the powers of hell_.

Indra and the other inferior gods (compare note 11) were for ever
engaged in hostilities with their half-brothers, the demons
called Daityas, who were the giants or Titans of Hindú mythology.
On such occasions the gods seem to have depended very much upon
the assistance they received from mortal heroes.

42. _Evil demons are disturbing our sacrificial rites_.

The religious rites and sacrifices of holy men were often
disturbed by certain evil spirits or goblins called Rákshasas,
who were the determined enemies of piety and devotion. No great
sacrifice or religious ceremony was ever carried on without an
attempt on the part of these demons to impede its celebration;
and the most renowned saints found it necessary on such occasions
to acknowledge their dependence on the strong arm of the military
class, by seeking the aid of warriors and heroes. The inability
of holy men, who had attained the utmost limit of spiritual
power, to cope with the spirits of evil, and the superiority of
physical force in this respect, is very remarkable.

43. _Vishnu_.

Vishnu, the Preserver, was one of the three gods of the Hindú
Triad. He became incarnate in various forms for the good of
mortals, and is the great enemy of the demons.

14 _Like king Tri[s']anku_.

The story of this monarch is told in the Rámáyana. He is there
described as a just and pious prince of the solar race, who
aspired to celebrate a great sacrifice, hoping thereby to ascend
to heaven in his mortal body. After various failures he had
recourse to Vi[s']wámitra, who undertook to conduct the sacrifice,
and invited all the gods to be present. They, however, refused to
attend; upon which the enraged Vi[s']wámitra, by his own power,
transported Tri[s']anku to the skies, whither he had no sooner
arrived than he was hurled down again by Indra and the gods; but
being arrested in his downward course by the sage, he remained
suspended between heaven and earth, forming a constellation in
the southern hemisphere.

45. _Ointment of Usíra-root_.

The root of a fragrant grass (_Andropogon muricatum_), from
which a cooling ointment was made.

46. _The very breath of his nostrils_.

Compare Lam. iv. 20. 'The breath of our nostrils, the anointed of
the Lord, was taken.'

47. _God of the flowery shafts_.

The Hindú Cupid, or god of love (Káma), is armed with a bow made
of sugar-cane, the string of which consists of bees. He has five
arrows, each tipped with the blossom of a flower, which pierce
the heart through the five senses; and his favourite arrow is
pointed with the _chita_, or mango-flower.

48. _E'en now in thy unbodied essence lurks The fire of [S']iva's
anger_.

The story is thus told in the Rámáyana. Káma (Cupid) once
approached [S']iva that he might influenceformer states of existence
are supposed occasionally to cross the mind. Compare note 37.

75. _The Chamberlain_.

The attendant on the women's apartment. He is generally a
Bráhman, and usually appears in the plays as a tottering and
decrepit old man, leaning on his staff of office.  76. _The king
of serpents on his thousand heads_.

A mythological serpent, the personification of eternity, and king
of the Nágas, or snakes, who inhabit Pátála, the lowermost of the
seven regions below the earth. His body formed the couch of
Vishnu, reposing on the waters of Chaos, whilst his thousand
heads were the god's canopy. He is also said to uphold the world
on one of his heads.

77. _The chamber of the consecrated fire_.

Compare note 61.

78. _Two heralds_.

These heralds were introduced into Hindú plays something in the
same manner as a Chorus; and, although their especial duty was to
announce, in measured verse, the periods of the day, and
particularly the fixed divisions into which the king's day was
divided, yet the strain which they poured forth frequently
contained allusions to incidental circumstances. The royal office
was no sinecure. From the Da[s']a-kumára, it appears that the day
and night were each divided into eight portions of one hour and a
half, reckoned from sunrise; and were thus distributed: Day--l.
The king, being dressed, is to audit accounts; 2. He is to
pronounce judgment in appeals; 3. He is to breakfast; 4. He is to
receive and make presents; 5. He is to discuss political
questions with his ministers; 6. He is to amuse himself; 7. He is
to review his troops; 8. He is to hold a military council.
Night--l. He is to receive the reports of his spies and envoys;
2. He is to sup or dine; 3. He is to retire to rest after the
perusal of some sacred work; 4 and 5. He is to sleep; 6. He is to
rise and purify himself; 7. He is to hold a private consultation
with his ministers, and instruct his officers; 8. He is to attend
upon the _Purohita_ or family priest, for the performance of
religious ceremonies. See Wilson's Hindú Theatre, vol. i. p. 209.

79. _Feeling a quivering sensation in her right eyelid_.

Compare note 18.

80. _The protector of the four classes of the people, the
guardian of the four conditions of the priesthood_.

A remarkable feature in the ancient Hindú social system, as
depicted in the plays, was the division of the people into four
classes or castes:--1st. The sacerdotal, consisting of the
Bráhmans.--2nd. The military, consisting of fighting men, and
including the king himself and the royal family. This class
enjoyed great privileges, and must have been practically the most
powerful.--3rd. The commercial, including merchants and
husbandmen.--4th. The servile, consisting of servants and slaves.
Of these four divisions the first alone has been preserved in its
purity to the present day, although the Rájputs claim to be the
representatives of the second class. The others have been lost in
a multitude of mixed castes formed by intermarriage, and bound
together by similarity of trade or occupation. With regard to the
sacerdotal class, the Bráhmans, who formed it, were held to be
the chief of all human beings; they were superior to the king,
and their lives and property were protected by the most stringent
laws. They were to divide their lives into four quarters, during
which they passed through four states or conditions, viz. as
religious students, as householders, as anchorites, and as
religious mendicants.

81. _That he is pleased with ill-assorted unions_.

The god Brahmá seems to have enjoyed a very unenviable notoriety
as taking pleasure in ill-assorted marriages, and encouraging
them by his own example in the case of his own daughter.

82. _[S']achí's sacred pool near Sakrávatára_.

[S']akra is a name of the god Indra, and Sakrávatára is a sacred
place of pilgrimage where he descended upon earth. [S']achí is his
wife, to whom a _Urtha_, or holy bathing-place, was probably
consecrated at the place where [S']akoontalá had performed her
ablutions. Compare note 14.

83. _The wily Koïl_.

Compare note 66.

84. _With the discus or mark of empire in the lines of his
hand_.

When the lines of the right hand formed themselves into a circle,
it was thought to be the mark of a future hero or emperor.

85. _A most refined occupation, certainly!_

Spoken ironically. The occupation of a fisherman, and, indeed, any
occupation which involved the sin of slaughtering animals, was
considered despicable. Fishermen, butchers, and leather-sellers were
equally objects of scorn. In Lower Bengal the castes of Jáliyás and
Bágdis, who live by fishing, etc., are amongst the lowest, and eke
out a precarious livelihood by thieving and dacoity.

86. _And he should not forsake it_.

The great Hindú lawgiver is very peremptory in restricting
special occupations (such as fishing, slaughtering animals,
basket-making) to the mixed and lowest castes. 'A man of the
lowest caste, who, through covetousness, lives by the acts of the
highest, let the king strip of all his wealth and banish. His own
business, though badly performed, is preferable to that of
another, though well performed.'--Manu, x. 96. In the later Hindú
system the sacrifice of animals is practised by the priests of
the goddess Káli only.

87. _Carp_.

That is, the Rohita, or Rohi (red) fish (_Cyprinus rohita_), a
kind of carp found in lakes and ponds in the neighbourhood of the
Ganges. It grows to the length of three feet, is very voracious,
and its flesh, though it often has a muddy taste, is edible. Its
back is olive-coloured, its belly of a golden hue, its fins and
eyes red. This fish is often caught in tanks in Lower Bengal of
the weight of twenty-five or thirty pounds.

88. _I long to begin binding the flowers round his head_.

It is evident from the Málati-Mádhava, and other plays, that a
victim, about to be offered as a sacrifice, had a wreath of
flowers bound round the head.

89. _The great vernal festival_.

In celebration of the return of Spring, and said to be in honour
of Krishna, and of his son Káma-deva, the god of love. It is
identified with the Holí or Dolá-yátra, the Saturnalia, or
rather, Carnival of the Hindús, when people of all conditions
take liberties with each other, especially by scattering red
powder and coloured water on the clothes of persons passing in
the street, as described in the play called Ratnávalí, where the
crowd are represented as using syringes and waterpipes. Flowers,
and especially the opening blossoms of the mango, would naturally
be much employed for decoration at this festival, as an offering
to the god of love. It was formerly held on the full moon of the
month Chaitra, or about the beginning of April, but it is now
celebrated on the full moon of Phálguna, or about the beginning
of March. The other great Hindú festival, held in the autumn,
about October, is called Durgá-pújá, being in honour of the
goddess Durgá. The Holí festival is now so disfigured by unseemly
practices and coarse jests that it is reprobated by the
respectable natives, and will probably, in the course of time,
either die out or be prohibited by legal enactment.

90. _Am not I named after the Koïl?_

Compare note 66.

91. _Thy fire unerring shafts_.

Compare note 47.

92. _The amaranth_

That is, the Kuruvaka, either the crimson amaranth, or a purple
species of _Barleria_.

93. _My finger burning with the glow of love_.

However offensive to our notions of good taste, it is certain
that, in Hindú erotic poetry, a hot hand is considered to be one
of the signs of passionate love. Compare Othello, Act III. Scene
4. 'Give me your hand: this hand is moist, my lady--hot, hot,
and moist.'

94. _The airy vapours of the desert_.

A kind of mirage floating over waste places, and appearing at a
distance like water. Travellers and some animals, especially
deer, are supposed to be attracted and deceived by it.

95. _Himálaya_.

The name of this celebrated range of mountains is derived from
two Sanskrit words, _hima_, 'ice' or 'snow' (Lat. _hiems_), and
_álaya_, 'abode.' The pronunciation Himalaya is incorrect.

96. _As [S']iva did the poison at the Deluge_.

At the churning of the ocean, after the Deluge, by the gods and
demons, for the recovery or production of fourteen sacred things,
a deadly poison called Kála-kúta, or Halá-hala, was generated, so
virulent that it would have destroyed the world, had not the god
[S']iva swallowed it. Its only effect was to leave a dark blue mark
on his throat, whence his name Níla-kantha. This name is also
given to a beautiful bird, not wholly unlike our jay, common in
Bengal.

97. _Palace of clouds_.

The palace of King Dushyanta, so called because it was lofty as
the clouds.

98. _The foreman of a guild belonging to Ayodhyá_.

The chief of a guild or corporation of artisans practising the
same trade. Ayodhyá, or the Invincible City, was the ancient
capital of Rámachandra, founded by Ikshwáku, the first of the
Solar dynasty. It was situated on the river Sarayu in the north
of India, and is now called Oude.

99. _My ancestors Must drink these glistening tears, the last
libation_.

Oblations to the spirits of the deceased are offered by the
nearest surviving relatives soon after the funeral ceremonies;
and are repeated once in every year. They are supposed to be
necessary to secure the well-being of the souls of the dead in
the world appropriated to them. The oblation-ceremony is called
[S']ráddha, and generally consisted in offering balls made of rice
and milk, or in pouring out water, or water and sesamum-seed
mixed. These ceremonies are still regarded as essential to the
welfare of deceased persons, and their celebration is marked by
magnificent feasts, to which relations and a host of Bráhmans are
invited. A native who had grown rich in the time of Warren
Hastings spent nine lakhs of rupees on his mother's [S']ráddha; and
large sums are still spent on similar occaail of a dragon, was decapitated by Vishnu
at the churning of the ocean; but, as he had previously tasted of
the Amrit or nectar reproduced at that time, he was thereby
rendered immortal, and his head and tail, retaining their
separate existence, were transferred to the stellar sphere. The
head was called Ráhu, and became the cause of eclipses, by
endeavouring at various times to swallow the sun and moon. So in
the Hitopade[s']a, line 192, the moon is said to be eaten by Ráhu.
With regard to the love of the Moon for Rohiní, the fourth lunar
constellation, see note 53.

123. _All unadorned_.

That is, from the absence of colouring or paint.

124. _The power of darkness_.

According to Hindú philosophy there are three qualities or
properties which together make up or dominate humanity: 1.
_Sattwa_, 'excellence' or 'goodness' (quiescence), whence
proceed truth, knowledge, purity, etc. 2. _Rajas_, 'passion'
(activity), which produces lust, pride, falsehood, etc., and is
the cause of pain. 3. _Tamas_, 'darkness' (inertia), whence
proceed ignorance, infatuation, delusion, mental blindness, etc.

125. _Children of Brahmá's sons_.

Ka[s']yapa and Adití were the children of Maríchi and Daksha
respectively, and these last were the sons of Brahmá.

126. _The ruler of the triple world_.

That is, Indra, lord of heaven, earth, and the lower regions.
Compare notes 110, 113.

127. _Whom Vishnu, greater than the Self-existent_.

Vishnu, as Náráyana, or the Supreme Spirit, moved over the waters
before the creation of the world, and from his navel came the lotus
from which Brahmá, the World's Creator, here called the Self-existent,
sprang. As Vishnu, the Preserver, he became incarnate in various
forms; and chose Ka[s']yapa and Adití, from whom all human beings
were descended, as his medium of incarnation, especially in the Avatár
in which he was called Upendra, 'Indra's younger brother.' Hence it
appears that the worshippers of Vishnu exalt him above the Creator.

128. _The earth's seven sea-girt isles_.

According to the mythical geography of the Hindús, the earth
consisted of seven islands, or rather insular continents,
surrounded by seven seas. That inhabited by men was called
Jambudwípa, and was in the centre, having in the middle of it the
sacred mountain Meru or Sumeru, a kind of Mount Olympus inhabited
by the gods. About Jambu flowed the sea of salt-water which
extends to the second Dwípa, called Plaksha, which is in its turn
surrounded by a sea of sugar-cane juice. And so with the five
other Dwípas, viz. Sálmali, Ku[S']a, Krauncha, [S']áka, and Pushkara,
which are severally surrounded by the seas of wine, clarified
butter, curds, milk, and fresh water.

129. _Bharata_.

The name Bharata is derived from the root bhri (fero),'to
support.' Many Indian princes were so named, but the most
celebrated was this son of Dushyanta and [S']akoontalá, who so
extended his empire that from him the whole of India was called
Bharata-varsha or Bhárata-varsha; and whose descendants, the sons
of Dhritaráshtra and Pándu, by their quarrels, formed the subject
of the great epic poem called Mahá-bhárata. The Hindús at the
present day continue to call India by the name Bhárata-varsha.

180. _The Sage Bharata_.

The Bharata here intended must not be confounded with the young
prince. He was a holy sage, the director or manager of the gods'
dramas, and inventor of theatrical representations in general. He
wrote a work containing precepts and rules relating to every
branch of dramatic writing, which appears to have been lost, but
is constantly quoted by the commentators. (See p. xxix.)

131. _Saraswatí_.

She is the goddess of speech and eloquence, patroness of the arts
and sciences, and inventress of the Sanskrit language. There is a
festival still held in her honour for two days, about February in
every year, when no Hindú will touch a pen or write a letter. The
courts are all closed accordingly.

132. _The purple self-existent god_.

[S']iva is usually represented as borne on a bull; his colour, as
well as that of the animal he rides, being white, to denote the
purity of Justice, over which he presides. In his destroying
capacity, he is characterized by the quality 'darkness,' and
named Rudra, Kála, etc., when his colour is said to be purple or
black. Some refer the epithet 'purple' to the colour of his
throat; compare note 96. Self-existent, although properly a name
of the Supreme Being (Brahmá), is applied both to Vishnu and
[S']iva by their votaries.

134. _Whose vital Energy_.

That is, [S']iva's wife, Párvatí, who was supposed to personify his
energy or active power. Exemption from further transmigration,
and absorption into the divine soul, was the _summum bonum_ of
Hindú philosophy. Compare note 37.

135. _By my divine faculty of meditation_.

Celestial beings were endowed with a mental faculty (called
dhyána, pranidhána, etc.), which enabled them to arrive at the
knowledge of present and future events.

136. _A roseate dye wherewith to stain The lady's feet_.

That is, the soles of her feet. It was customary for Hindú ladies
to stain the soles of their feet of a red colour with the dye
made from lac--a minute insect bearing some resemblance to the
cochineal--which punctures the bark of the Indian fig-tree, and
surrounds itself with the milky resinous juice of that tree.
This custom is a alluded to in one of Paterson's Hindú odes--

  'The rose that humbly bowed to meet,
  With glowing lips, her hallowed feet,
  And lent them all its bloom.'

See Megha-dúta (Edit. Johnson), p. 32.




























End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Sakoontala or The Lost Ring, by Kalidasa

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SAKOONTALA OR THE LOST RING ***

***** This file should be named 12169-8.txt or 12169-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/1/2/1/6/12169/

Produced by Charles Aldarondo, Keren Vergon, jayam and PG Distributed
Proofreaders


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm Llks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     http://www.gutenberg.net/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     http://www.gutenberg.net/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     http://www.gutenberg.net/GUTINDEX.ALL
