rliest Sanskrit drama with which we are acquainted, the
'Clay-cart,' translated by my predecessor in the Boden Chair at
Oxford, Professor H.H. Wilson, is attributed to a regal author, King
[S']údraka, the date of whose reign cannot be fixed with any certainty,
though some have assigned it to the first or second century B.C.
Considering that the nations of Europe can scarcely be said to have
possessed a dramatic literature before the fourteenth or fifteenth
century of the present era, the great age of the Hindú plays would of
itself be a most interesting and attractive circumstance, even if
their poetical merit were not of a very high order. But when to the
antiquity of these productions is added their extreme beauty and
excellence as literary compositions, and when we also take into
account their value as representations of the early condition of Hindú
society--which, notwithstanding the lapse of two thousand years, has
in many particulars obeyed the law of unchangeableness ever stamped on
the manners and customs of the East--we are led to wonder that the
study of the Indian drama has not commended itself in a greater degree
to the attention of Europeans, and especially of Englishmen. The
English student, at least, is bound by considerations of duty, as well
as curiosity, to make himself acquainted with a subject which
elucidates and explains the condition of the millions of Hindús who
owe allegiance to his own Sovereign, and are governed by English laws.

Of all the Indian dramatists, indeed of all Indian poets, the most
celebrated is Kálidása, the writer of the present play. The late
Professor Lassen thought it probable that he flourished about the
middle of the third century after Christ. Professor Kielhorn of
Göttingen has proved that the composer of the Mandasor Inscription
(A.D. 472) knew Kálidása's Ritusamhára. Hence it may be inferred that
Lassen was not far wrong[1]. Possibly some King named Vikramáditya
received Kálidása at his Court, and honoured him by his patronage
about that time. Little, however, is known of the circumstances of his
life. There is certainly no satisfactory evidence to be adduced in
support of the tradition current in India that he lived in the time
of the _great_ King Vikramáditya I., whose capital was Ujjayiní, now
Oujein.

From the absence of historical literature in India, our knowledge of
the state of Hindústán between the incursion of Alexander and the
Muhammadan conquest is very slight. But it is ascertained with
tolerable accuracy that, after the invasion of the kingdoms of Bactria
and Afghánistán, the Tartars or Scythians (called by the Hindús
'[S']akas') overran the north-western provinces of India, and retained
possession of them. The great Vikramáditya or Vikramárka succeeded in
driving back the barbaric hordes beyond the Indus, and so consolidated
his empire that it extended over the whole of Northern Hindústán. His
name is even now cherished among the Hindús with pride and affection.
His victory over the Scythians is believed to have taken place about
B.C. 57. At any rate this is the starting-point of the Vikrama (also
called the Málava and in later times the Samvat) era, one of the
epochs from which the Hindús still continue to count. There is good
authority for affirming that the reign of this Vikramárka or
Vikramáditya was equal in brilliancy to that of any monarch in any
age. He was a liberal patron of science and literature, and gave
splendid encouragement to poets, philologists, astronomers, and
mathematicians. Nine illustrious men of genius are said to have
adorned his Court, and to have been supported by his bounty. They were
called the 'Nine Gems'; and a not unnatural tradition, which, however,
must be considered untrustworthy, included Kálidása among the Nine.

To Kálidása (as to another celebrated Indian Dramatist, Bhavabhúti,
who probably flourished in the eighth century) only three plays are
attributed; and of these the '[S']akoontalá' (here translated) has
acquired the greatest celebrity [2].

Indeed, the popularity of this play with the natives of India exceeds
that of any other dramatic, and probably of any other poetical
composition [3]. But it is not in India alone that the '[S']akoontalá' is
known and admired. Its excellence is now recognized in every
literary circle throughout the continent of Europe; and its beauties,
if not yet universally known and appreciated, are at least
acknowledged by many learned men in every country of the civilized
world. The four well-known lines of Goethe, so often quoted in
relation to the Indian drama, may here be repeated:

  'Willst du die Blüthe des frühen, die Früchte des
    späteren Jahres,
  Willst du was reizt und entzückt, willst du was sättigt
    und nährt,
  Willst du den Himmel, die Erde, mit einem Namen
    begreifen:
  Nenn' ich, [S']akoontalá, Dich, und so ist Alles gesagt.'

  'Would'st thou the young year's blossoms and the fruits
    of its decline,
  And all by which the soul is charmed, enraptured,
    feasted, fed?
  Would'st thou the Earth and Heaven itself in one sole
    name combine?
  I name thee, O [S']akoontalá! and all at once is said.'

 _E.B. Eastwick_.

Augustus William von Schlegel, in his first Lecture on Dramatic
Literature, says: 'Among the Indians, the people from whom perhaps all
the cultivation of the human race has been derived, plays were known
long before they could have experienced any foreign influence. It has
lately been made known in Europe that they have a rich dramatic
literature, which ascends back for more than two thousand years. The
only specimen of their plays (Nátaks) hitherto known to us is the
delightful [S']akoontalá, which, notwithstanding the colouring of a
foreign clime, bears in its general structure a striking resemblance
to our romantic drama.'

Alexander von Humboldt, in treating of Indian poetry, observes:
'Kálidása, the celebrated author of the [S']akoontalá, is a masterly
describer of the influence which Nature exercises upon the minds of
lovers. This great poet flourished at the splendid court of
Vikramáditya, and was, therefore, cotemporary with Virgil and Horace.
Tenderness in the expression of feeling, and richness of creative
fancy, have assigned to him his lofty place among the poets of all
nations'.

These considerations induced me, in 1853, to compile and publish an
edition of the text of the '[S']akoontalá' from various original MSS.,
with English translations of the metrical passages, and explanatory
notes. A second edition of this work has since been published by the
Delegates of the Oxford University Press. To the notes of that edition
I must refer all students of Sanskrit literature who desire a close
and literal translation of the present drama, and in the Preface will
be found an account of various other editions and translations.

The following pages contain a  _free_ translation, and the first
English version in prose and metre, of the purest recension of the
most celebrated drama of the Shakespeare of India.

The need felt by the British public for some such translation as I
have here offered can scarcely be questioned. A great people, who,
through their empire in India, command the destinies of the Eastern
world, ought surely to be conversant with the most popular of Indian
dramas, in which the customs of the Hindús, their opinions,
prejudices, and fables, their religious rites, daily occupations and
amusements, are reflected as in a mirror. Nor is the prose translation
of Sir W. Jones (excellent though it be) adapted to meet the
requirements of modern times. That translation was unfortunately made
from corrupt manuscripts (the best that could then be procured), in
which the bold phraseology of Kálidása has been occasionally weakened,
his delicate expressions of refined love clothed in an unbecoming
dress, and his ideas, grand in their simplicity, diluted by repetition
or amplification. It is, moreover, altogether unfurnished with
explanatory annotations. The present translation, on the contrary,
while representing the purest version of the drama, has abundant
notes, sufficient to answer the exigencies of the non-oriental
scholar.

It may be remarked that in every Sanskrit play the women and inferior
characters speak a kind of provincial dialect or _patois_, called
Prákrit--bearing the relation to Sanskrit that Italian bears to Latin,
or that the spoken Latin of the age of Cicero bore to the highly
polished Latin in which he delivered his Orations. Even the heroine of
the drama is made to speak in the vernacular dialect. The hero, on the
other hand, and all the higher male characters, speak in Sanskrit; and
as if to invest them with greater dignity, half of what they say is in
verse. Indeed the prose part of their speeches is often very
commonplace, being only introductory to the lofty sentiment of the
poetry that follows. Thus, if the whole composition be compared to a
web, the prose will correspond to the warp, or that part which is
extended lengthwise in the loom, while the metrical portion will
answer to the cross-threads which constitute the woof.

The original verses are written in a great variety of Sanskrit metres.
For example, the first thirty-four verses of '[S']akoontalá' exhibit
eleven different varieties of metre. No English metrical system could
give any idea of the almost infinite resources of Sanskrit in this
respect. Nor have I attempted it. Blank verse has been employed by me
in my translation, as more in unison with the character of our own
dramatic writings, and rhyming stanzas have only been admitted when
the subject-matter seemed to call for such a change. Perhaps the chief
consideration that induced me to adopt this mode of metrical
translation was, that the free and unfettered character of the verse
enabled me to preserve more of the freshness and vigour of the
original. If the poetical ideas of Kálidása have not been expressed in
language as musiessed to the
favourite deity, and spoken by one of the principal personages of the
drama.

Although, in the conduct of the plot, and the delineation of
character, Hindú dramatists show considerable skill, yet they do not
appear to have been remarkable for much fertility of invention. Love,
according to Hindú notions, is the subject of most of their dramas.

The hero, who is generally a king, and already the husband of a wife
or wives (for a wife or two more or less is no encumbrance in Indian
plays), is suddenly smitten with the charms of a lovely woman,
sometimes a nymph, or, as in the case of [S']akoontalá, the daughter of a
nymph by a mortal father. The heroine is required to be equally
impressible, and the first tender glance from the hero's eye reaches
her heart. With true feminine delicacy, however, she locks the secret
of her passion in her own breast, and by her coyness and reserve keeps
her lover for a long period in the agonies of suspense. The hero,
being reduced to a proper state of desperation, is harassed by other
difficulties. Either the celestial nature of the nymph is in the way
of their union, or he doubts the legality of the match, or he his own
unworthiness, or he is hampered by the angry jealousy of a previous
wife. In short, doubts, obstacles, and delays make great havoc of both
hero and heroine. They give way to melancholy, indulge in amorous
rhapsodies, and become very emaciated. So far, it must be confessed,
the story is decidedly dull, and its pathos, notwithstanding the
occasional grandeur and beauty of the imagery, often verges on the
ridiculous.

But, by way of relief, an element of life is generally introduced in
the character of the Vidúshaka, or Jester, who is the constant
companion of the hero; and in the young maidens, who are the
confidential friends of the heroine, and soon become possessed of her
secret. By a curious regulation, the Jester is always a Bráhman, and
therefore of a caste superior to the king himself; yet his business is
to excite mirth by being ridiculous in person, age, and attire. He is
sometimes represented as grey-haired, hump-backed, lame, and ugly. In
fact, he is a species of buffoon, who is allowed full liberty of
speech, being himself a universal butt. His attempts at wit, which are
rarely very successful, and his allusions to the pleasures of the
table, of which he is a confessed votary, are absurdly contrasted with
the sententious solemnity of the despairing hero, crossed in the
prosecution of his love-suit. His clumsy interference in the intrigues
of his friend only serves to augment his difficulties, and occasions
many an awkward dilemma. On the other hand, the shrewdness of the
heroine's confidantes never seems to fail them under the most trying
circumstances; while their sly jokes and innuendos, their love of fun,
their girlish sympathy with the progress of the love affair, their
warm affection for their friend, heighten the interest of the plot,
and contribute not a little to vary its monotony.

Fortunately, in the '[S']akoontalá' the story is diversified and the
interest well sustained by a chain of stirring incidents. The first
link of the chain, however, does not commence until the Fourth Act,
when the union of the heroine with King Dushyanta, and her acceptance
of the marriage-ring as a token of recognition, are supposed to have
taken place. Then follows the King's departure and temporary desertion
of his bride; the curse pronounced on [S']akoontalá by the choleric Sage;
the monarch's consequent loss of memory; the bride's journey to the
palace of her husband; the mysterious disappearance of the
marriage-token; the public repudiation of [S']akoontalá; her miraculous
assumption to a celestial asylum; the unexpected discovery of the ring
by a poor fisherman; the King's agony on recovering his recollection;
his aërial voyage in the car of Indra; his strange meeting with the
refractory child in the groves of Kasyapa; the boy's battle with the
young lion; the search for the amulet, by which the King is proved to
be his father; the return of [S']akoontalá, and the happy reunion of the
lovers;--all these form a connected series of moving and interesting
incidents. The feelings of the audience are wrought up to a pitch of
great intensity; and whatever emotions of terror, grief, or pity may
have been excited, are properly tranquillized by the happy termination
of the story.

Indeed, if a calamitous conclusion be necessary to constitute a
tragedy, the Hindú dramas are never tragedies. They are mixed
compositions, in which joy and sorrow, happiness and misery, are woven
in a mingled web--tragi-comic representations, in which good and evil,
right and wrong, truth and falsehood, are allowed to blend in
confusion during the first Acts of the drama. But, in the last Act,
harmony is always restored, order succeeds to disorder, tranquillity
to agitation; and the mind of the spectator, no longer perplexed by
the apparent ascendency of evil, is soothed, and purified, and made to
acquiesce in the moral lesson deducible from the plot.

The play of '[S']akoontalá,' as Sir W. Jones observes, must have been
very popular when it was first performed. The Indian empire was then
in its palmy days, and the vanity of the natives would be flattered by
the introduction of those kings and heroes who were supposed to have
laid the foundation of its greatness and magnificence, and whose were
connected with all that was sacred and holy in their religion,
Dushyanta, the hero of the drama, according to Indian legends, was one
of the descendants of the Moon, or in other words, belonged to the
Lunar dynasty of Indian princes; and, if any dependence may be placed
on Hindú chronology, he must have lived in the twenty-first or
twenty-second generation after the Flood. Puru, his most celebrated
ancestor, was the sixth in descent from the Moon's son Budha, who
married a daughter of the good King Satya-vrata, preserved by Vishnu
in the Ark at the time of the Deluge. The son of Dushyanta, by
[S']akoontalá, was Bharata, from whom India is still called by the
natives Bhárata-varsha. After him came Samvarana, Kuru, Sántanu,
Bhíshma, and Vyasa. The latter was the father of Dhritaráshtra and
Pándu, the quarrels of whose sons form the subject of the great
Sanskrit epic poem called Mahá-bhárata, a poem with parts of which the
audience would be familiar, and in which they would feel the greatest
pride. Indeed the whole story of [S']akoontalá is told in the
Mahá-bhárata. The pedigree of [S']akoontalá, the heroine of the drama,
was no less interesting, and calculated to awaken the religious
sympathies of Indian spectators. She was the daughter of the
celebrated Vi[s']wámitra, a name associated with many remarkable
circumstances in Hindú mythology and history. His genealogy and the
principal events of his life are narrated in the Rámáyana, the first
of the two epic poems which were to the Hindús what the Iliad and the
Odyssey were to the Greeks. He was originally of the regal caste; and,
having raised himself to the rank of a Bráhman by the length and
rigour of his penance, he became the preceptor of Rámachandra, who
was the hero of the Rámáyana, and one of the incarnations of the god
Vishnu. With such an antecedent interest in the particulars of the
story, the audience could not fail to bring a sharpened appetite, and
a self-satisfied frame of mind, to the performance of the play.

Although in the following translation it has been thought expedient to
conform to modern usage, by indicating at the head of each Act the
scene in which it is laid, yet it is proper to apprise the English
reader that in scenery and scenic apparatus the Hindú drama, must have
been very defective. No directions as to changes of scene are given in
the original text of the play. This is the more curious, as there are
numerous stage directions, which prove that in respect of dresses and
decorations the resources of the Indian theatre were sufficiently
ample.

It is probable that a curtain suspended across the stage, and divided
in the centre, answered all the purposes of scenes. Behind the curtain
was the space or room called _nepathya_, where the decorations were
kept, where the actors attired themselves, and remained in readiness
before entering the stage, and whither they withdrew on leaving it.
When an actor was to enter hurriedly, he was directed to do so 'with a
toss of the curtain.'

The machinery and paraphernalia of the Indian theatre were also very
limited, contrasting in this respect unfavourably with the ancient
Greek theatre, which appears to have comprehended nearly all that
modern ingenuity has devised. Nevertheless, seats, thrones, weapons,
and chariots, were certainly introduced, and as the intercourse
between the inhabitants of heaven and earth was very frequent, it is
not improbable that there may have been aërial contrivances to
represent the chariots of celestial beings, as on the Greek stage. It
is plain, however, from the frequent occurrence of the word
_nátayitwá_, 'gesticulating,' 'acting,' that much had to be supplied
by the imagination of the spectator, assisted by the gesticulations of
the actors.

For further information relative to the dramatic system of the Hindús,
the reader is referred to the notes appended to the present
translation. It is hoped that they will be found sufficient to explain
every allusion that might otherwise be unintelligible to the English
reader.

MONIER MONIER-WILLIAMS.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 1: In the Aihole Inscription (edited by Dr. Fleet) of the
Western Chálukya King Pulike[S']in II, dated [S']aka 556=A.D. 634-35,
actual mention is made of Kálidása and Bháravi by name, and Professor
Kielhorn has informed me that he found a verse from the Raghu-van[S']a
quoted in an inscription dated A.D. 602.]

[Footnote 2: As to the other two, the most celebrated, called
Vikramorva[S']í, has been excellently translated by Professors H.H.tered fragments strewn,
  The half-chewed grass falls from his panting mouth;
  See! in his airy bounds he seems to fly,
  And leaves no trace upon th' elastic turf.

                                           [_With astonishment_.]

How now! swift as is our pursuit, I scarce can see him.

CHARIOTEER.

Sire, the ground here is full of hollows; I have therefore drawn
in the reins and checked the speed of the chariot. Hence the deer
has somewhat gained upon us. Now that we are passing over level
ground, we shall have no difficulty in overtaking him.

KING.

Loosen the reins, then.

CHARIOTEER.

The King is obeyed.

                            [_Drives the chariot at full speed_.]

Great Prince, see I see!

  Responsive to the slackened rein, the steeds,
  Chafing with eager rivalry, career
  With emulative fleetness o'er the plain;
  Their necks outstretched, their waving plumes, that late
  Fluttered above their brows, are motionless[10];
  Their sprightly ears, but now erect, bent low;
  Themselves unsullied by the circling dust,
  That vainly follows on their rapid course.

KING.                                                [_Joyously_.

In good sooth, the horses seem as if they would outstrip the
steeds of Indra and the Sun[11].

  That which but now showed to my view minute
  Quickly assumes dimension; that which seemed
  A moment since disjoined in diverse parts,
  Looks suddenly like one compacted whole;
  That which is really crooked in its shape
  In the far distance left, grows regular;
  Wondrous the chariot's speed, that in a breath,
  Makes the near distant and the distant near.

Now, Charioteer, see me kill the deer.

                                                    [_Takes aim_.

A VOICE BEHIND THE SCENES.

Hold, O King! this deer belongs to our hermitage.
Kill it not! kill it not!

CHARIOTEER.                             [_Listening and looking_.

Great King, some hermits have stationed themselves so as to
screen the antelope at the very moment of its coming within range
of your arrow.

KING.                                                 [_Hastily_.

Then stop the horses.

CHARIOTEER.

I obey.

                                            [_Stops the chariot_.

_Enter a_ HERMIT, _and two others with him_.]

HERMIT.                                      [_Raising his hand_.

This deer, O King, belongs to our hermitage. Kill
it not! kill it not!

  Now heaven forbid this barbed shaft descend
  Upon the fragile body of a fawn,
  Like fire upon a heap of tender flowers!
  Can thy steel bolts no meeter quarry find
  Than the warm life-blood of a harmless deer?
  Restore, great Prince, thy weapon to its quiver.
  More it becomes thy arms to shield the weak,
  Than to bring anguish on the innocent.

KING.

'Tis done.

                             [_Replaces the arrow in its quiver_.

HERMIT.

Worthy is this action of a Prince, the light of Puru's race[12].

  Well does this act befit a Prince like thee,
  Right worthy is it of thine ancestry.
  Thy guerdon be a son of peerless worth,
  Whose wide dominion shall embrace the earth.

BOTH THE OTHER HERMITS.                   [_Raising their hands_.

May heaven indeed grant thee a son, a sovereign of the earth from
sea to sea!

KING.

                                                       [_Bowing_.

I accept with gratitude a Bráhman's benediction.

HERMIT.

We came hither, mighty Prince, to collect sacrificial wood. Here
on the banks of the Máliní you may perceive the hermitage of the
great sage Kanwa[13]. If other duties require not your presence,
deign to enter and accept our hospitality.

  When you behold our penitential rites
  Performed without impediment by saints
  Rich only in devotion, then with pride
  Will you reflect:--Such are the holy men
  Who call me Guardian; such the men for whom
  To wield the bow I bare my nervous arm,
  Scarred by the motion of the glancing string.

KING.

Is the Chief of your Society now at home?

HERMIT.

No; he has gone to Soma-tírtha[14] to propitiate Destiny, which
threatens his daughter [S']akoontalá with some calamity; but he has
commissioned her in his absence to entertain all guests with
hospitality.

KING.

Good! I will pay her a visit. She will make me acquainted with
the mighty sage's acts of penance and devotion.

HERMIT.

And we will depart on our errand.

                                     [_Exit with his companions_.

KING.

Charioteer, urge on the horses. We will at least purify our souls
by a sight of this hallowed retreat.

CHARIOTEER.

Your Majesty is obeyed.

                       [_Drives the chariot with great velocity_.

KING.                                   [_Looking all about him_.

Charioteer, even without being told, I should have known that
these were the precincts of a grove consecrated to penitential
rites.

CHARIOTEER.

How so?

KING.

Do not you observe?

  Beneath the trees, whose hollow trunks afford
  Secure retreat to many a nestling brood
  Of parrots, scattered grains of rice lie strewn.
  Lo! here and there are seen the polished slabs
  That serve to bruise the fruit of Ingudí[15].
  The gentle roe-deer, taught to trust in man,
  Unstartled hear our voices. On the paths
  Appear the traces of bark-woven vests[16]
  Borne dripping from the limpid fount of waters.

And mark!

  Laved are the roots of trees by deep canals [17],
  Whose glassy waters tremble in the breeze;
  The sprouting verdure of the leaves is dimmed
  By dusky wreaths of upward curling smoke
  From burnt oblations; and on new-mown lawns
  Around our car graze leisurely the fawns.

CHARIOTEER.

I observe it all.

KING.                              [_Advancing a little further_.

The inhabitants of this sacred retreat must not be disturbed.
Stay the chariot, that I may alight.

CHARIOTEER.

The reins are held in. Your Majesty may descend.

KING.                                               [_Alighting_.

Charioteer, groves devoted to penance must be entered in humble
attire. Take these ornaments.

                [_Delivers his ornaments and bow to CHARIOTEER_.]

Charioteer, see that the horses are watered, and attend to them
until I return from visiting the inhabitants of the hermitage.

CHARIOTEER.

I Will.

                                                         [_Exit_.

KING.                               [_Walking and looking about_.

Here is the entrance to the hermitage. I will now go in.

[_Entering and feeling a throbbing sensation in his arm_.

  Serenest peace is in this calm retreat,
  By passion's breath unruffled; what portends
  My throbbing arm[18]? Why should it whisper here
  Of happy love? Yet everywhere around us
  Stand the closed portals of events unknown.

A VOICE BEHIND THE SCENES.

This way, my dear companions; this way.

KING.                                               [_Listening_.

Hark! I hear voices to the right of yonder grove
of trees. I will walk in that direction.

                                  [_Walking and looking about_.]

Ah! here are the maidens of the hermitage coming this way to
water the shrubs, carrying water-pots proportioned to their
strength.

                                              [_Gazing at them_.]

How graceful they look!

  In palaces such charms are rarely ours;
  The woodland plants outshine the garden flowers.

I will conceal myself in this shade and watch them.

                                        [_Stands gazing at them_.

_Enter [S']AKOONTALÁ, with her two female companions, employed in
the manner described_.

[S']AKOONTALÁ

This way, my dear companions; this way.

ANASÚYÁ.

Dear [S']akoontalá, one would think that father Kanwa had more
affection for the shrubs of the hermitage even than for you,
seeing he assigns to you, who are yourself as delicate as the
fresh-blown jasmine, the task of filling with water the trenches
which encircle their roots.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.

Dear Anasúyá, although I am charged by my good father with this
duty, yet I cannot regard it as a task. I really feel a sisterly
love for these plants.

                                [_Continues watering the shrubs_.

KING.

Can this be the daughter of Kanwa? The saintly man, though
descended from the great Kasyapa, must be very deficient in
judgment to habituate such a maiden to the life of a recluse.

  The sage who would this form of artless grace
  Inure to penance, thoughtlessly attempts
  To cleave in twain the hard acacia's stem[19]
  With the soft edge of a blue lotus-leaf.

Well! concealed behind this tree, I will watch her without
raising her suspicions.

                                             [_Conceals himself_.


[S']AKOONTALÁ.

Good Anasúyá, Priyamvadá has drawn this bark-dress too tightly
about my chest. I pray thee, loosen it a little.

ANASÚYÁ.

I will.                                            [_Loosens it_.

PRIYAMVADÁ.                                           [_Smiling_.

Why do you lay the blame on me? Blame rather your own blooming
youthfulness which imparts fulness to your bosom.

KING.

A most just observation!

  This youthful form, whose bosom's swelling charms
  By the bark's knotted tissue are concealed,
  Like some fair bud close folded in its sheath,
  Gives not to view the blooming of its beauty.

But what am I saying? In real truth this bark-dress,
though ill-suited to her figure, sets it off like an ornament.

  The lotus[20] with the [S']aivala[21] entwined
  Is not a whit less brilliant; dusky spots
  Heighten the lustre of the cold-rayed moon;
  This lovely maiden in her dress of bark
  Seems all the lovelier. E'en the meanest garb
  Gives to true beauty fresh attractiveness.

[S']AKOONTALÁ. [Looking before her.

Yon Ke[S']ara-tree[22] beckons to me with its young shoots, which,
as the breeze waves them to and fro, appear like slender fingers.
I will go and attend to it.

                                             [_Walks towards it_.

PRIYAMVADÁ.

Dear [S']akoontalá, prithee, rest in that attit respecting your friend.

  Will she be bound by solitary vows
  Opposed to love, till her espousals only?
  Or ever dwell with these her cherished fawns,
  Whose eyes, in lustre vying with her own,
  Return her gaze of sisterly affection?

PRIYAMVADÁ.

Hitherto, Sir, she has been engaged in the practice of religious
duties, and has lived in subjection to her foster-father; but it
is now his fixed intention to give her away in marriage to a
husband worthy of her.

KING.                                                   [_Aside_.

His intention may be easily carried into effect.

  Be hopeful, O my heart, thy harrowing doubts
  Are past and gone; that which thou didst believe
  To be as unapproachable as fire,
  Is found a glittering gem that may be touched.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.                                 [_Pretending anger_.

Anasúyá, I shall leave you.

ANASÚYÁ.

Why so?

[S']AKOONTALÁ.

That I may go and report this impertinent Priyamvadá to the
venerable matron, Gautamí[29].

ANASÚYÁ.

Surely, dear friend, it would not be right to leave a
distinguished guest before he has received the rites of
hospitality, and quit his presence in this wilful manner.

            [[S']AKOONTALÁ, _without answering a word, moves away_.

KING.

        [_Making a movement to arrest her departure, but checking
                                                 himself. Aside_.

Ah! a lover's feelings betray themselves by his gestures.

  When I would fain have stayed the maid, a sense
  Of due decorum checked my bold design;
  Though I have stirred not, yet my mien betrays
  My eagerness to follow on her steps.

PRIYAMVADÁ.

                                     [_Holding [S']AKOONTALÁ back_.

Dear [S']akoontalá, it does not become you to go away in this
manner.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.                                         [_Frowning_.

Why not, pray?

PRIYAMVADÁ.

You are under a promise to water two more shrubs for me. When you
have paid your debt, you shall go, and not before.

                                      [_Forces her to turn back_.

KING.

Spare her this trouble, gentle maiden. The exertion of watering
the shrubs has already fatigued her.

  The water-jar has overtasked the strength
  Of her slim arms; her shoulders droop, her hands
  Are ruddy with the glow of quickened pulses;
  E'en now her agitated breath imparts
  Unwonted tremor to her heaving breast;
  The pearly drops that mar the recent bloom
  Of the [S']irísha pendent in her ear,
  Gather in clustering circles on her cheek;
  Loosed is the fillet of her hair; her hand
  Restrains the locks that struggle to be free.
  Suffer me, then, thus to discharge the debt for you.

   [_Offers a ring to_ PRIYAMVADÁ. _Both the maidens, reading the
            name_ DUSHYANTA _on the seal, look at each other with
                                                       surprise_.

KING.

Nay, think not that I am King Dushyanta. I am only the King's
officer, and this is the ring which I have received from him as
my credentials.

PRIYAMVADÁ.

The greater the reason you ought not to part with the ring from
your finger. I am content to release her from her obligation at
your simple request.

[_With a smile_.]

Now, [S']akoontalá, my love, you are at liberty to retire, thanks
to the intercession of this noble stranger, or rather of this
mighty prince.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.                                            [_Aside_.

My movements are no longer under my own control.

                                                        [_Aloud_.

Pray, what authority have you over me, either to send me away or
keep me back?

KING.                          [_Gazing at_ [S']AKOONTALÁ. _Aside_.

Would I could ascertain whether she is affected towards me as I
am towards her! At any rate, my hopes are free to indulge
themselves. Because,

  Although she mingles not her words with mine,
  Yet doth her listening ear drink in my speech;
  Although her eye shrinks from my ardent gaze,
  No form but mine attracts its timid glances.

A VOICE BEHIND THE SCENES.

O hermits, be ready to protect the animals belonging to our
hermitage. King Dushyanta, amusing himself with hunting, is near
at hand.

  Lo! by the feet of prancing horses raised,
  Thick clouds of moving dust, like glittering swarms
  Of locusts, in the glow of eventide,
  Fall on the branches of our sacred trees
  Where hang the dripping vests of woven bark,
  Bleached by the waters of the cleansing fountain.

And see!

  Scared by the royal chariot in its course,
  With headlong haste an elephant invades
  The hallowed precincts of our sacred grove;
  Himself the terror of the startled deer,
  And an embodied hindrance to our rites.
  The hedge of creepers clinging to his feet,
  Feeble obstruction to his mad career,
  Is dragged behind him in a tangled chain;
  And with terrific shock one tusk he drives
  Into the riven body of a tree,
  Sweeping before him all impediments.

KING.                                                   [_Aside_.

Out upon it! my retinue are looking for me, and are disturbing
this holy retreat. Well! there is no help for it; I must go and
meet them.

PRIYAMVADÁ AND ANASÚYÁ.

Noble Sir, we are terrified by the accidental disturbance caused
by the wild elephant. Permit us to return to the cottage.

KING.                                                 [_Hastily_.

Go, gentle maidens. It shall be our care that no injury happen to
the hermitage.

                                                  [_All rise up_.

PRIYAMVADÁ AND ANASÚYÁ.

After such poor hospitality, we are ashamed to request the honour
of a second visit from you.

KING.

Say not so. The mere sight of you, sweet maidens, has been to me
the best entertainment.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.

Anasúyá, a pointed blade of Ku[s']a-grass [30] has pricked my foot;
and my bark-mantle is caught in the branch of a Kuruvaka-bush[31].
Be so good as to wait for me until I have disentangled it.

            [_Exit with her two companions, after making pretexts
              for delay, that she may steal glances at the_ KING.

KING.

I have no longer any desire to return to the city. I will
therefore rejoin my attendants, and make them encamp somewhere in
the vicinity of this sacred grove. In good truth, [S']akoontalá has
taken such possession of my thoughts, that I cannot turn myself
in any other direction.

  My limbs drawn onward leave my heart behind,
  Like silken pennon borne against the wind.

       *       *       *       *       *




ACT II.


SCENE.--_A plain on the skirts of the forest.

Enter the Jester_ [32] MÁ[T.]HAVYA, _in a melancholy mood_.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.                                            [_Sighing_.

Heigh-ho! what an unlucky fellow I am! worn to a shadow by my
royal friend's sporting propensities. 'Here's a deer!' 'There
goes a boar!' 'Yonder's a tiger!' This is the only burden of our
talk, while in the heat of the meridian sun we toil on from
jungle to jungle, wandering about in the paths of the woods,
where the trees afford us no shelter. Are we thirsty? We have
nothing to drink but the dirty water of some mountain stream
mixed with dry leaves, which give it a most pungent flavour. Are
we hungry? We have nothing to eat but roast game[33], which we
must swallow down at odd times, as best we can. Even at night
there is no peace to be had. Sleeping is out of the question,
with joints all strained by dancing attendance upon my sporting
friend; or if I do happen to doze, I am awakened at the very
earliest dawn by the horrible din of a lot of rascally beaters
and huntsmen, who must needs surround the wood before sunrise,
and deafen me with their clatter. Nor are these my only troubles.
Here's a fresh grievance, like a new boil rising upon an old
one! Yesterday, while we were lagging behind, my royal friend
entered yonder hermitage after a deer; and there, as ill-luck
would have it, caught sight of a beautiful girl, called
[S']akoontalá, the hermit's daughter. From that moment, not another
thought about returning to the city! and all last night not a
wink of sleep did he get for thinking of the damsel. What is to
be done? At any rate I will be on the watch for him as soon as he
has finished his toilet.

                                   [_Walking and looking about_.]

Oh! here he comes, attended by the Yavana women[34], with bows in
their hands, wearing garlands of wild flowers. What shall I do? I
have it. I will pretend to stand in the easiest attitude for
resting my bruised and crippled limbs.

                                    [_Stands leaning on a staff_.

_Enter King_ DUSHYANTA, _followed by a retinue, in the manner
described_.

KING.

  True, by no easy conquest may I win her,
  Yet are my hopes encouraged by her mien,
  Love is not yet triumphant; but, methinks,
  The hearts of both are ripe for his delights.

                                                      [_Smiling_.

Ah! thus does the lover delude himself; judging of the state of
his loved one's feelings by his own desires. But yet,

  The stolen glance with half-averted eye,
  The hesitating gait, the quick rebuke
  Addressed to her companion, who would fain
  Have stayed her counterfeit departure; these
  Are signs not unpropitious to my suit.
  So eagerly the lover feeds his hopes,
  Claiming each trivial gesture for his own.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

                                   [_Still in the same attitude_.

Ah, friends, my hands cannot move to greet you with the usual
salutation. I can only just command my lips to wish your Majesty
victory.

KING.

Why, what has paralysed your limbs?

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

You might as well ask me how my eye comes to water after you have
poked your finger into it.

KING.

I don't understand you; speak more intelligibly.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

Ah, my dear friend, is yonder upright reed transformed into a
crooked plant by its own act, or by the force of the current?

KING.

The current of the river causes it, I suppose.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

xclaimed,
  'My foot is wounded by this prickly grass,'
  Then, glancing at me tenderly, she feigned
  Another charming pretext for delay,
  Pretending that a bush had caught her robe
  And turned as if to disentangle it.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA

I trust you have laid in a good stock of provisions,
for I see you intend making this consecrated grove your
game-preserve, and will be roaming here in quest of sport for
some time to come.

KING.

You must know, my good fellow, that I have been recognised by
some of the inmates of the hermitage. Now I want the assistance
of your fertile invention, in devising some excuse for going
there again.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

There is but one expedient that I can suggest. You are the King,
are you not?

KING.

What then?

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

Say you have come for the sixth part of their grain [38], which
they owe you for tribute.

KING.

No, no, foolish man; those hermits pay me a very different kind
of tribute, which I value more than heaps of gold or jewels;
observe,

  The tribute which my other subjects bring
  Must moulder into dust, but holy men
  Present me with a portion of the fruits
  Of penitential services and prayers--
  A precious and imperishable gift.

A VOICE BEHIND THE SCENES.

We are fortunate; here is the object of our search.

KING.                                               [_Listening_.

Surely those must be the voices of hermits, to judge by their
deep tones.

WARDER.                                              [_Entering_.

Victory to the King! two young hermits are in waiting outside,
and solicit an audience of your Majesty.

KING.

Introduce them Immediately.

WARDER.

I will, my liege.

[_Goes out, and re-enters with_ TWO YOUNG HERMITS.]

This way, Sirs, this way.

                           [_Both the_ HERMITS _look at the KING.

FIRST HERMIT.

How majestic is his mien, and yet what confidence it inspires!
But this might be expected in a king, whose character and habits
have earned for him a title only one degree removed from that of
a Sage [39].

  In this secluded grove, whose sacred joys
  All may participate, he deigns to dwell
  Like one of us; and daily treasures up
  A store of purest merit for himself,
  By the protection of our holy rites.
  In his own person wondrously are joined
  Both majesty and saintlike holiness;
  And often chanted by inspired bards [40],
  His hallowed title of 'Imperial Sage'
  Ascends in joyous accents to the skies.

SECOND HERMIT.

Bear in mind, Gautama, that this is the great Dushyanta, the
friend of Indra.

FIRST HERMIT.

What of that?

SECOND HERMIT.

  Where is the wonder if his nervous arm,
  Puissant and massive as the iron bar
  That binds a castle-gateway, singly sways
  The sceptre of the universal earth,
  E'en to its dark-green boundary of waters?
  Or if the gods, beholden to his aid
  In their fierce warfare with the powers of hell [41],
  Should blend his name with Indra's in their songs
  Of victory, and gratefully accord
  No lower meed of praise to his braced bow,
  Than to the thunders of the god of heaven?

BOTH THE HERMITS.                                 [_Approaching_.

Victory to the King!

KING.                                    [_Rising from his seat_.

Hail to you both!

BOTH THE HERMITS.

Heaven bless your Majesty!

                                            [_They offer fruits_.

KING.                     [_Respectfully receiving the offering_.

Tell me, I pray you, the object of your visit.

BOTH THE HERMITS.

The inhabitants of the hermitage, having heard of your Majesty's
sojourn in our neighbourhood, make this humble petition:--

KING.

What are their commands?

BOTH THE HERMITS.

In the absence of our Superior, the great sage Kanwa, evil demons
are disturbing our sacrificial rites [42]. Deign, therefore,
accompanied by your charioteer, to take up your abode in our
hermitage for a few days.

KING.

I am honoured by your invitation.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.                                              [_Aside_.

Most opportune and convenient, certainly!

KING.                                                 [_Smiling_.

Ho, there, Raivatika! Tell the charioteer from me to bring round
the chariot with my bow.

WARDER.

I will, Sire.

                                                         [_Exit_.

BOTH THE HERMITS.                                    [_Joyfully_.

  Well it becomes the King by acts of grace
  To emulate the virtues of his race.
  Such acts thy lofty destiny attest;
  Thy mission is to succour the distressed.

KING.                                   [_Bowing to the_ HERMITS.

Go first, reverend Sirs, I will follow you immediately.

BOTH THE HERMITS.

May victory attend you!

                                                       [_Exeunt_.

KING.

My dear Má[T.]Havya, are not you full of longing to see
[S']akoontalá?

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

To tell you the truth, though I was just now brimful of desire to
see her, I have not a drop left since this piece of news about
the demons.

KING.

Never fear; you shall keep close to me for protection.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

Well, you must be my guardian-angel, and act the part of a very
Vishnu [43] to me.

WARDER.                                              [_Entering_.

Sire, the chariot is ready, and only waits to conduct you to
victory. But here is a messenger named Karabhaka, just arrived
from your capital, with a message from the Queen, your mother.

KING.                                            [_Respectfully_.

How say you? a messenger from the venerable Queen?

WARDER.

Even so.

KING.

Introduce him at once.

WARDER.

I will, Sire.

[_Goes out and re-enters with_ KARABHAKA.]

Behold the King. Approach.

KARABHAKA.

Victory to the King! The Queen-mother bids me say that in four
days from the present time she intends celebrating a solemn
ceremony for the advancement and preservation of her son. She
expects that your Majesty will honour her with your presence on
that occasion.

KING.

This places me in a dilemma. Here, on the one hand, is the
commission of these holy men to be executed; and, on the other,
the command of my revered parent to be obeyed. Both duties are
too sacred to be neglected. What is to be done?

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

You will have to take up an intermediate position between the
two, like King Tri[s']anku [44], who was suspended between heaven
and earth, because the sage Vi[s']wámitra commanded him to mount up
to heaven, and the gods ordered him down again.

KING.

I am certainly very much perplexed. For here,

  Two different duties are required of me
  In widely distant places; how can I
  In my own person satisfy them both?
  Thus is my mind distracted, and impelled
  In opposite directions like a stream
  That, driven back by rocks, still rushes on,
  Forming two currents in its eddying course.

                                                  [_Reflecting_.]

Friend Má[T.]Havya, as you were my playfellow in childhood, the
Queen has already received you like a second son; go you, then,
back to her, and tell her of my solemn engagement to assist these
holy men. You can supply my place in the ceremony, and act the
part of a son to the Queen.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

With the greatest pleasure in the world; but don't suppose that
I am really coward enough to have the slightest fear of those
trumpery demons.

KING.

Oh! of course not; a great Bráhman like you could not possibly
give way to such weakness.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

You must let me travel in a manner suitable to the King's younger
brother.

KING.

Yes, I shall send my retinue with you, that there may be no
farther disturbance in this sacred forest.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA,                                       [_With a strut_.

Already I feel quite like a young prince.

KING.                                                   [_Aside_.

This is a giddy fellow, and in all probability he will let out
the truth about my present pursuit to the women of the palace.
What is to be done? I must say something to deceive him.

[_Aloud to_ MÁ[T.]HAVYA, _taking him by the hand_.]

Dear friend, I am going to the hermitage wholly and solely out of
respect for its pious inhabitants, and not because I have really
any liking for [S']akoontalá, the hermit's daughter. Observe:--

  What suitable communion could there be
  Between a monarch and a rustic girl?
  I did but feign an idle passion, friend,
  Take not in earnest what was said in jest.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

Don't distress yourself; I quite understand.

                                                       [_Exeunt_.

       *       *       *       *       *




PRELUDE TO ACT III.

SCENE.--_The Hermitage_.

_Enter a_ YOUNG BRÁHMAN _carrying bundles of ku[S']a-grass for the
use of the sacrificing priest_.

YOUNG BRÁHMAN.

How wonderful is the power of King Dushyanta! No sooner did he
enter our hermitage, than we were able to proceed with our
sacrificial rites, unmolested by the evil demons.

  No need to fix the arrow to the bow;
  The mighty monarch sounds the quivering string,
  And, by the thunder of his arms dismayed,
  Our demon foes are scattered to the wind.

I must now, therefore, make haste and deliver to the sacrificing
priests these bundles of Ku[s']a-grass, to be strewn round the
altar.

[_Walking and looking about; then addressing some one off the
stage_.]

Why, Priyamvadá, for whose use are you carrying that ointment of
Usíra-root and those lotus-leaves with fibres attached to them?

[_Listening for her answer_.]

What Say you?--that [S']akoontalá is suffering from fever produced
by exposure to the sun, and that this ointment is to cool her
burning frame? Nurse her with care, then, Priyamvadá, for she is
cherished by our reverend Superior as the very breath of his
nostrils[46]. I, for my part, will contrive that soothing waters,
hallowed in the sacrifice, he administered to her by the hands of
Gautamí.

                                                         [_Exit_.


ACT III.


SCENE.--_The Sacred Grove_.

_Enter_ KING DUSHYANTA, _with the air  from my eyes in scalding streams,
  Slips towards my elbow from my shrivelled wrist.
  Oft I replace the bauble, but in vain;
  So easily it spans the fleshless limb
  That e'en the rough and corrugated skin,
  Scarred by the bow-string, will not check its fall[54].

PRIYAMVADÁ.

An idea strikes me, Anasúyá. Let [S']akoontalá write a love-letter;
I will conceal it in a flower, and contrive to drop it in the
King's path. He will surely mistake it for the remains of some
sacred offering, and will, in all probability, pick it up.

ANASÚYÁ.

A very ingenious device! It my entire approval; but what says
[S']akoontalá?

[S']AKOONTALÁ.

I must consider before I can consent to it.

PRIYAMVADÁ.

Could, you not, dear [S']akoontalá, think of some pretty
composition in verse, containing a delicate declaration of your
love?

[S']AKOONTALÁ.

Well, I will do my best; but my heart trembles when I think of
the chances of a refusal.

KING.                                            [_With rapture_.

  Too timid maid, here stands the man from whom
  Thou fearest a repulse; supremely blessed
  To call thee all his own. Well might he doubt
  His title to thy love; but how could'st thou
  Believe thy beauty powerless to subdue him?

PRIYAMVADÁ AND ANASÚYÁ.

You undervalue your own merits, dear [S']akoontalá. What man in his
senses would intercept with the skirt of his robe the bright rays
of the autumnal moon, which alone can allay the fever of his
body?

[S']AKOONTALÁ.                                           [_Smiling_.

Then it seems I must do as I am bid.

                         [_Sits down and appears to be thinking_.

KING.

How charming she looks! My very eyes forget to wink, jealous of
losing even for an instant a sight so enchanting.

  How beautiful the movement of her brow,
  As through her mind love's tender fancies flow!
  And, as she weighs her thoughts, how sweet to trace
  The ardent passion mantling in her face!

[S']AKOONTALÁ.

Dear girls, I have thought of a verse, but I have no
writing-materials at hand.

PRIYAMVADÁ.

Write the letters with your nail on this lotus-leaf, which is
smooth as a parrot's breast.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.                          [_After writing the verse_.

Listen, dear friends, and tell me whether the ideas are
appropriately expressed.

PRIYAMVADÁ AND ANASÚYÁ.

We are all attention.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.                                             [_Reads_.

  I know not the secret thy bosom conceals,
  Thy form is not near me to gladden my sight;
  But sad is the tale that my fever reveals,
  Of the love that consumes me by day and by night.

KING.                           [_Advancing hastily towards her_.

  Nay, Love does but warm thee, fair maiden,--thy frame
  Only droops like the bud in the glare of the noon;
  But me he consumes with a pitiless flame,
  As the beams of the day-star destroy the pale moon.

PRIYAMVADÁ AND ANASÚYÁ.

             [_Looking at him joyfully and rising to salute him_.

Welcome, the desire of our hearts, that so speedily presents
itself!

                          [[S']AKOONTALÁ _makes an effort to rise_.

KING.

Nay, trouble not thyself, dear maiden.

  Move not to do me homage; let thy limbs
  Still softly rest upon their flowery couch;
  And gather fragrance from the lotus-stalks,
  Bruised by the fevered contact of thy frame.

ANASÚYÁ.

Deign, gentle Sir, to seat yourself on the rock on which our
friend is reposing.

              [_The_ KING _sits down_. [S']AKOONTALÁ _is confused_.

PRIYAMVADÁ.

Any one may see at a glance that you are deeply attached to each
other. But the affection I have for my friend prompts me to say
something of which you hardly require to be informed.

KING.

Do not hesitate to speak out, my good girl. If you omit to say
what is in your mind, you may be sorry for it afterwards.

PRIYAMVADÁ.

Is it not your special office as a King to remove the suffering
of your subjects who are in trouble?

KING.

Such is my duty, most assuredly.

PRIYAMVADÁ.

Know, then, that our dear friend has been brought to her present
state of suffering entirely through love for you. Her life is in
your hands; take pity on her and restore her to health.

KING.

Excellent maiden, our attachment is mutual. It is I who am the
most honoured by it.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.                            [_Looking at PRIYAMVADÁ_.

What do you mean by detaining the King, who must be anxious to
return to his royal consorts after so long a separation?

KING.

  Sweet maiden, banish from thy mind the thought
  That I could love another. Thou dost reign
  Supreme, without a rival, in my heart,
  And I am thine alone; disown me not,
  Else must I die a second deadlier death,
  Killed by thy words, as erst by Káma's[47] shafts.

ANASÚYÁ.

Kind Sir, we have heard it said that kings have many favourite
consorts. You must not, then, by your behaviour towards our dear
friend, give her relations cause to sorrow for her.

KING.

Listen, gentle maiden, while in a few words I quiet your anxiety.

  Though many beauteous forms my palace grace,
  Henceforth two things alone will I esteem
  The glory of my royal dynasty--
  My sea-girt realm, and this most lovely maid.

PRIYAMVADÁ AND ANASÚYÁ.

We are satisfied by your assurances.

PRIYAMVADÁ.                              [_Glancing on one side_.

See, Anasúyá, there is our favourite little fawn running about in
great distress, and turning its eyes in every direction as if
looking for its mother; come, let us help the little thing to
find her. [_Both move away_.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.

Dear friends, dear friends, leave me not alone and unprotected.
Why need you both go?

PRIYAMVADÁ AND ANASÚYÁ.

Unprotected! when the Protector of the world is at your side.

                                                       [_Exeunt_.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.

What! have they both really left me?

KING.

Distress not thyself, sweet maiden. Thy adorer is at hand to wait
upon thee.

  Oh let me tend thee, fair one, in the place
  Of thy dear friends; and with broad lotus fans
  Raise cooling breezes to refresh thy frame;
  Or shall I rather, with caressing touch,
  Allay the fever of thy limbs, and soothe
  Thy aching feet, beauteous as blushing lilies?

[S']AKOONTALÁ.

Nay, touch me not. I will not incur the censure of those whom I
am bound to respect.

                                     [_Rises and attempts to go_.

KING.

Fair one, the heat of noon has not yet subsided, and thy body is
still feeble.

  How canst thou quit thy fragrant couch of flowers,
  And from thy throbbing bosom cast aside
  Its covering of lotus-leaves, to brave
  With weak and fainting limbs the noon-day heat?

                                      [_Forces her to turn back_.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.

Infringe not the rules of decorum, mighty descendant of Puru.
Remember, though I love you, I have no power to dispose of
myself.

KING.

Why this fear of offending your relations, timid maid? When your
venerable foster-father hears of it, he will not find fault with
you. He knows that the law permits us to be united without
consulting him.

  In Indra's heaven, so at least 'tis said,
  No nuptial rites prevail[55], nor is the bride
  Led to the altar by her future lord;
  But all in secret does the bridegroom plight
  His troth, and each unto the other vow
  Mutual allegiance. Such espousals, too,
  Are authorised on earth, and many daughters
  Of royal saints thus wedded to their lords
  Have still received their father's benison.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.

Leave me, leave me; I must take counsel with my female friends.

KING.

I will leave thee when--

[S']AKOONTALÁ.

When?

KING.

  When I have gently stolen from thy lips
  Their yet untasted nectar, to allay
  The raging of my thirst, e'en as the bee
  Sips the fresh honey from the opening bud.

             [_Attempts to raise her face_.  [S']AKOONTALÁ tries to
                                                    prevent him_.

A VOICE BEHIND THE SCENES.

The loving birds, doomed by fate to nightly separation[56], must
bid farewell to each other, for evening is at hand.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.                                    [_In confusion_.

Great Prince, I hear the voice of the matron Gautamí. She is
coming this way to inquire after my health. Hasten and conceal
yourself behind the branches.

KING.

I will.                                      [_Conceals himself_.

_Enter_ GAUTAMÍ _with a vase in her hand, preceded by two
attendants_.

ATTENDANTS.

This way, most venerable Gautamí.

GAUTAMÍ.                               [_Approaching_ [S']AKOONTALÁ.

My child, is the fever of thy limbs allayed?

[S']AKOONTALÁ.

Venerable mother, there is certainly a change for the better.

GAUTAMÍ.

Let me sprinkle you with this holy water, and all
your ailments will depart.

[_Sprinkling_ [S']AKOONTALÁ on the head_.]

The day is closing, my child; come, let us go to the cottage.

                                           [_They all move away_.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.                                             [_Aside_.

Oh my heart! thou didst fear to taste of happiness when it was
within thy reach. Now that the object of thy desires is torn from
thee, how bitter will be thy remorse, how distracting thine
anguish!

[_Moving on a few steps and stopping. Aloud_.]

Farewell! bower of creepers, sweet soother of my sufferings,
farewell! may I soon again be happy under thy shade.

                             [_Exit reluctantly with the others_.

KING.

          [_Returning to his former seat in the arbour. Sighing_.

Alas! how many are the obstacles to the accomplishment of our
wishes!

  Albeit she did coyly turn away
  Her glowing cheek, and with her fingers guard
  Her pouting lips, that murmured a denial
  In faltering accents, she did yield herself
  A sweet reluctant captive to my will.
  As eagerly I raised her lovely face;
  But ere with gentle force I stole the kiss,
  Too envious Fate did mar my daring purpose.

Whithe he said, 'we have had an auspicious omen. The priest who
offered the oblation dropped it into the very centre of the
sacred fire [81], though thick smoke obstructed his vision.
Henceforth thou wilt cease to be an object of compassion. This
very day I purpose sending thee, under the charge of certain
trusty hermits, to the King's palace; and shall deliver thee into
the hands of thy husband, as I would commit knowledge to the
keeping of a wise and faithful student.'

ANASÚYÁ.

Who, then, informed the holy father of what passed in his
absence?

PRIYAMVADÁ.

As he was entering the sanctuary of the consecrated fire, an
invisible being chanted a verse in celestial strains.

ANASÚYÁ.                                    [_With astonishment_.

Indeed! pray repeat it.

PRIYAMVADÁ.                               [_Repeating the verse_.

  Glows in thy daughter King Dushyanta's glory,
  As in the sacred tree the mystic fire [62];
  Let worlds rejoice to hear the welcome story,
  And may the son immortalize the sire.

ANASÚYÁ.                                 [_Embracing_ PRIYAMVADÁ.

Oh, my dear Priyamvadá, what delightful news! I am pleased
beyond measure; yet when I think that we are to lose our dear
[S']akoontalá this very day, a feeling of melancholy mingles with
my joy.

PRIYAMVADÁ.

We shall find means of consoling ourselves after her departure.
Let the dear creature only be made happy at any cost.

ANASÚYÁ.

Yes, yes, Priyamvadá, it shall be so; and now to prepare the
bridal array. I have always looked forward to this occasion, and
some time since, I deposited a beautiful garland of Ke[S']ara
flowers in a cocoa-nut box, and suspended it on a bough of
yonder mango-tree. Be good enough to stretch out your hand and
take it down, while I compound unguents and perfumes with this
consecrated paste and these blades of sacred grass.

PRIYAMVADÁ.

Very well.

           [_Exit_ ANASÚYÁ. PRIYAMVADÁ  _takes down the flowers_.

A VOICE BEHIND THE SCENES.

Gautamí, bid [S']árngarava and the others hold themselves in
readiness to escort [S']akoontalá.

PRIYAMVADÁ.                                         [_Listening_.

Quick, quick, Anasúyá! They are calling the
hermits who are to go with [S']akoontalá to Hastinápur[83].

ANASÚYÁ. [_Re-entering with the perfumed unguents in her
hand_.

Come along then, Priyamvadá; I am ready to go with you.

                                               [_They walk away_.

PRIYAMVADÁ.                                           [_Looking_.

See! there sits [S']akoontalá, her locks arranged even at this
early hour of the morning. The holy women of the hermitage are
congratulating her, and invoking blessings on her head, while
they present her with wedding-gifts and offerings of consecrated
wild-rice. Let us join them.

                                               [_They approach_.

[S']AKOONTALÁ _is seen seated, with women surrounding her, occupied
in the manner described_.

FIRST WOMAN.                                  [_To_ [S']AKOONTALÁ.

My child, may'st thou receive the title of 'Chief-queen,' and may
thy husband delight to honour thee above all others!

SECOND WOMAN.

My child, may'st thou be the mother of a hero!

THIRD WOMAN.

My child, may'st thou be highly honoured by thy lord!

[_Exeunt all the women, excepting_ GAUTAMÍ, after blessing_
[S']AKOONTALÁ.

PRIYAMVADÁ AND ANASÚYÁ.                           [_Approaching_.

Dear [S']akoontalá, we are come to assist you at your toilet, and
may a blessing attend it!

[S']AKOONTALÁ.

Welcome, dear friends, welcome. Sit down here.

PRIYAMVADÁ AND ANASÚYÁ.

      [_Taking the baskets containing the bridal decorations, and
                                                   sitting down_.

Now, then, dearest, prepare to let us dress you. We must first
rub your limbs with these perfumed unguents.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.

I ought indeed to be grateful for your kind offices, now that I
am so soon to be deprived of them. Dear, dear friends, perhaps I
shall never be dressed by you again.

                                            [_Bursts into tears_.

PRIYAMVADÁ AND ANASÚYÁ.

Weep not, dearest; tears are out of season on such a happy
occasion.

              [_They wipe away her tears and begin to dress her_.

PRIYAMVADÁ.

Alas! these simple flowers and rude ornaments, which our
hermitage offers in abundance, do not set off your beauty as it
deserves.

_Enter TWO YOUNG HERMITS, bearing costly presents_.

BOTH HERMITS.

Here are ornaments suitable for a queen.

[_The women look at them in astonishment_.

GAUTAMÍ

Why, Nárada, my son, whence came these?

FIRST HERMIT.

You owe them to the devotion of Father Kanwa.

GAUTAMÍ.

Did he create them by the power of his own mind?

SECOND HERMIT.

Certainly not; but you shall hear. The venerable sage ordered us
to collect flowers for [S']akoontalá from the forest-trees; and we
went to the wood for that purpose, when

  Straightway depending from a neighbouring tree
  Appeared a robe of linen tissue, pure
  And spotless as a moonbeam--mystic pledge
  Of bridal happiness; another tree
  Distilled a roseate dye wherewith to stain
  The lady's feet [135]; and other branches near
  Glistened with rare and costly ornaments.
  While, 'mid the leaves, the hands of forest-nymphs,
  Vying in beauty with the opening buds,
  Presented us with sylvan offerings.

PRIYAMVADÁ.                            [_Looking at_ [S']AKOONTALÁ.

The wood-nymphs have done you honour, indeed. This favour
doubtless signifies that you are soon to be received as a happy
wife into your husband's house, and are from this time forward to
become the partner of his royal fortunes.

[[S']AKOONTALÁ _appears abashed_.

FIRST HERMIT.

Come, Gautama; Father Kanwa has finished his ablutions. Let us go
and inform him of the favour we have received from the deities
who preside over our trees.

SECOND HERMIT.

By all means.

                                                       [_Exeunt_.

PRIYAMVADÁ AND ANASÚYÁ

Alas! what are we to do? We are unused to such splendid
decorations, and are at a loss how to arrange them. Our
knowledge of painting must be our guide. We will dispose the
ornaments as we have seen them in pictures.

[S']AKOONTALÁ

Whatever pleases you, dear girls, will please me. I have perfect
confidence In your taste.

                                   [_They commence dressing her_.

_Enter_ KANWA, _having just finished his ablutions_.

KANWA.

  This day my loved one leaves me, and my heart
  Is heavy with its grief; the streams of sorrow,
  Choked at the source, repress my faltering voice,
  I have no words to speak; mine eyes are dimmed
  By the dark shadows of the thoughts that rise
  Within my soul. If such the force of grief
  In an old hermit parted from his nursling,
  What anguish must the stricken parent feel--
  Bereft for ever of an only daughter.

[_Advances towards_ [S']AKOONTALÁ

PRIYAMVADÁ AND ANASÚYÁ.

Now, dearest [S']akoontalá, we have finished decorating you. You
have only to put on the two linen mantles.

                            [[S']AKOONTALÁ _rises and puts them on_.

GAUTAMÍ.

Daughter, see, here comes thy foster-father; he is eager to fold
thee in his arms; his eyes swim with tears of joy. Hasten to do
him reverence.

[S']AKOONTALÁ                                        [_Reverently_.

My father, I salute you.

KANWA.

My daughter,

  May'st thou be highly honoured by thy lord,
  E'en as Yayáti [S']armishthá adored[64]!
  And, as she bore him Puru, so may'st thou
  Bring forth a son to whom the world shall bow!

GAUTAMÍ.

Most venerable father, she accepts your benediction as if she
already possessed the boon it confers.

KANWA.

Now come this way, my child, and walk reverently
round these sacrificial fires.

                                          [_They all walk round_.

KANWA.

                [_Repeats a prayer in the metre of the Rig-veda_.

  Holy flames, that gleam around
  Every altar's hallowed ground;
  Holy flames, whose frequent food
  Is the consecrated wood,
  And for whose encircling bed,
  Sacred Ku[s']a-grass is spread [65];
  Holy flames, that waft to heaven
  Sweet oblations daily given,
  Mortal guilt to purge away,
  Hear, oh hear me, when I pray--
  Purify my child this day!

Now then, my daughter, set out on thy journey.

[_Looking on one side_.]

Where are thy attendants. [S']árngarava and the others?

YOUNG HERMIT.                                        [_Entering_.

Here we are, most venerable father.

KANWA.

Lead the way for thy sister.

[S']ÁRNGARAVA.

Come, [S']akoontalá, let us proceed.

                                                [_All move away_.

KANWA.

  Hear me, ye trees that surround our hermitage!
  [S']akoontalá ne'er moistened in the stream
  Her own parched lips, till she had fondly poured
  Its purest water on your thirsty roots;
  And oft, when she would fain have decked her hair
  With your thick-clustering blossoms, in her love
  She robbed you not e'en of a single flower.
  Her highest joy was ever to behold
  The early glory of your opening buds;
  Oh, then, dismiss her with a kind farewell.
  This very day she quits her father's home,
  To seek the palace of her wedded lord.

[_The note of a Koïl[66] is heard_.

  Hark! heard'st thou not the answer of the trees,
  Our sylvan sisters, warbled in the note
  Of the melodious Koïl[66]? they dismiss
  Their dear [S']akoontalá with loving wishes.

VOICES IN THE AIR.

  Fare thee well, journey pleasantly on amid streams
  Where the lotuses bloom, and the sun's glowing beams
  Never pierce the deep shade of the wide-spreading trees,
  While gently around thee shall sport the cool breeze;
  Then light be thy footsteps and easy thy tread,
  Beneath thee shall carpets of lilies be spread;
  Journey on to thy lord, let thy spirit be gay,
  For the smiles of all Nature shall gladden thy way.

                                 [_All listen with astonishment spirit gain its last release.

GAUTAMÍ.

Come, my child, the favourable time for our journey is fast
passing. Let thy father return. Venerable Sire, be thou the first
to move homewards, or these last words will never end.

KANWA.

Daughter, detain me no longer. My religious duties must not be
interrupted.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.                [_Again embracing her foster-father_.

Beloved father, thy frame is much enfeebled by penitential
exercises. Do not, oh! do not, allow thyself to sorrow too much
on my account.

KANWA.                                                [_Sighing_.

  How, O my child, shall my bereaved heart
  Forget its bitterness, when, day by day,
  Full in my sight shall grow the tender plants
  Reared by thy care, or sprang from hallowed grain
  Which thy loved hands have strewn around the door--
  A frequent offering to our household gods[73]?

Go, my daughter, and may thy journey be prosperous.

                           [_Exit_ [S']AKOONTALÁ _with her escort_.

PRIYAMVADÁ AND ANASÚYÁ.              [_Gazing after_ [S']AKOONTALÁ.

Alas! alas! she is gone, and now the trees hide our darling from
our view.

KANWA.                                                [_Sighing_.

Well, Anasúyá, your sister has departed. Moderate your grief,
both of you, and follow me, I go back to the hermitage.

PRIYAMVADÁ AND ANASÚYÁ.

Holy father, the sacred grove will be a desert without
[S']akoontalá. How can we ever return to it?

KANWA.

It is natural enough that your affection should make you view it
in this light.

[_Walking pensively on_.]

As for me, I am quite surprised at myself. Now that I have fairly
dismissed her to her husband's house, my mind is easy; for,
indeed,

  A daughter is a loan--a precious jewel
  Lent to a parent till her husband claim her.
  And now that to her rightful lord and master
  I have delivered her, my burdened soul
  Is lightened, and I seem to breathe more freely.

                                                       [_Exeunt_.

       *       *       *       *       *




ACT V.

SCENE.--_A Room in the Palace_.

_The King_ DUSHYANTA _and the Jester_ MÁ[T.]HAVYA _are discovered
seated_.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.                                          [_Listening_.

Hark! my dear friend, listen a minute, and you will hear sweet
sounds proceeding from the music-room. Some one is singing a
charming air. Who can it be? Oh! I know. The queen Hansapadiká is
practising her notes, that she may greet you with a new song.

KING.

Hush! Let me listen.

A VOICE SINGS BEHIND THE SCENES.

  How often hither didst thou rove,
  Sweet bee, to kiss the mango's cheek;
  Oh! leave not, then, thy early love,
  The lily's honeyed lip to seek.

KING.

A most impassioned strain, truly!

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

Do you understand the meaning of the words?

KING.                                                 [_Smiling_.

She means to reprove me, because I once paid her great attention,
and have lately deserted her for the queen Vasumatí. Go, my dear
fellow, and tell Hansapadiká from me that I take her delicate
reproof as it is intended.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

Very well.

[_Rising from his seat_.]

But stay--I don't much relish being sent to bear the brunt of her
jealousy. The chances are that she will have me seized by the
hair of the head and beaten to a jelly. I would as soon expose
myself, after a vow of celibacy, to the seductions of a lovely
nymph, as encounter the fury of a jealous woman.

KING.

Go, go; you can disarm her wrath by a civil speech; but give her
my message.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

What must be must be, I suppose.

                                                         [_Exit_.

KING.                                                   [_Aside_.

Strange! that song has filled me with a most peculiar sensation.
A melancholy feeling has come over me, and I seem to yearn after
some long-forgotten object of affection. Singular, indeed! but

  Not seldom In our happy hours of ease,
  When thought is still, the sight of some fair form,
  Or mournful fall of music breathing low,
  Will stir strange fancies, thrilling all the soul
  With a mysterious sadness, and a sense
  Of vague yet earnest longing. Can it be
  That the dim memory of events long past,
  Or friendships formed in other states of being[74],
  Flits like a passing shadow o'er the spirit?

                                      [_Remains pensive and sad_.

_Enter the_ CHAMBERLAIN[75], _named_ VÁTÁYANA.

CHAMBERLAIN.

Alas! to what an advanced period of life have I attained!

  Even this wand betrays the lapse of years;
  In youthful days 'twas but a useless badge
  And symbol of my office; now it serves
  As a support to prop my tottering steps.

Ah me! I feel very unwilling to announce to the King that a
deputation of young hermits from the sage Kanwa has arrived, and
craves an immediate audience. Certainly, his Majesty ought not to
neglect a matter of sacred duty, yet I hardly like to trouble him
when he has just risen from the judgment-seat. Well, well; a
monarch's business is to sustain the world, and he must not
expect much repose; because--

  Onward, for ever onward, in his car
  The unwearied Sun pursues his daily course,
  Nor tarries to unyoke his glittering steeds.
  And, ever moving, speeds the rushing Wind
  Through boundless space, filling the universe
  With his life-giving breezes. Day and night,
  The King of Serpents on his thousand heads[76]
  Upholds the incumbent earth; and even so,
  Unceasing toil is aye the lot of kings,
  Who, in return, draw nurture from their subjects.

I will therefore deliver my message.

[_Walking on and looking about_.]

Ah! here comes the King.

  His subjects are his children; through the day,
  Like a fond father, to supply their wants,
  Incessantly he labours; wearied now,
  The monarch seeks seclusion and repose;
  E'en as the prince of elephants defies
  The sun's fierce heat, and leads the fainting herd
  To verdant pastures, ere his wayworn limbs
  He yields to rest beneath the cooling shade.

[_Approaching_.]

Victory to the King! So please your Majesty, some hermits who
live in a forest near the Snowy Mountains have arrived here,
bringing certain women with them. They have a message to deliver
from the sage Kanwa and desire an audience. I await your
Majesty's commands.

KING.                                            [_Respectfully_.

A message from the sage Kanwa, did you say?

CHAMBERLAIN.

Even so, my liege.

KING.

Tell my domestic priest Somaráta to receive the hermits with due
honour, according to the prescribed form. He may then himself
introduce them into my presence. I will await them in a place
suitable for the reception of such holy guests.

CHAMBERLAIN.

Your Majesty's commands shall be obeyed.

                                                         [_Exit_.

KING.                        [_Rising and addressing his_ WARDER.

Vetravatí, lead the way to the chamber of the consecrated
fire[77].

WARDER.

This way, Sire.

KING.

[_Walking on, with the air of one oppressed by the cares of
Government_.

People are generally contented and happy when they have gained
their desires; but kings have no sooner attained the object of
their aspirations than all their troubles begin.

  'Tis a fond thought that to attain the end
  And object of ambition is to rest;
  Success doth only mitigate the fever
  Of anxious expectation; soon the fear
  Of losing what we have, the constant care
  Of guarding it, doth weary. Ceaseless toil
  Must be the lot of him who with his hands
  Supports the canopy that shields his subjects.

TWO HERALDS[78].                            [_Behind the scenes_.

May the King be victorious!

FIRST HERALD.

  Honour to him who labours day by day
  For the world's weal, forgetful of his own;
  Like some tall tree that with its stately head
  Endures the solar beam, while underneath
  It yields refreshing shelter to the weary.

SECOND HERALD.

  Let but the monarch wield his threatening rod
  And e'en the guilty tremble; at his voice
  The rebel spirit cowers; his grateful subjects
  Acknowledge him their guardian; rich and poor
  Hail him a faithful friend--a loving kinsman.

KING.

Weary as I was before, this complimentary address has refreshed
me.

                                                     [_Walks on_.

WARDER.

Here is the terrace of the hallowed fire-chamber, and yonder
stands the cow that yields the milk for the oblations. The sacred
enclosure has been recently purified, and looks clean and
beautiful. Ascend, Sire.

KING. [Leans on the shoulders of his attendants and ascends_.

Vetravatí, what can possibly be the message that the venerable
Kanwa has sent me by these hermits?

  Perchance their sacred rites have been disturbed
  By demons, or some evil has befallen
  The innocent herds, their favourites, that graze
  Within the precincts of the hermitage,
  Or haply, through my sins, some withering blight
  Has nipped the creeping plants that spread their arms
  Around the hallowed grove. Such troubled thoughts
  Crowd through my mind, and fill me with misgiving.

WARDER.

If you ask my opinion, Sire, I think the hermits merely wish to
take an opportunity of testifying their loyalty, and are
therefore come to offer homage to your majesty.

_Enter the_ HERMITS _leading_ [S']AKOONTALÁ, _attended by_ GAUTAMÍ;
_and in advance of them, the_ CHAMBERLAIN _and the_ DOMESTIC
PRIEST.

CHAMBERLAIN.

This way, reverend Sirs, this way.

[S']ÁRNGARAVA

O [S']áradwata,

  'Tis true the monarch lacks no royal grace,
  Nor ever swerves from justice; true, his people,
  Yea such as in life's humblest walks are found,
  Refrain from evil courses; still to me,
  A lonely hermit reared in solitude,
  This throng appears bewildering, and I seem
  To look upon a burning house, whose inmates
  Are running to and fro in wild dismay.

[S']ÁRADWATA.

It is natural that the first sight of the King's capital should
affect you in this manner; my own sensations arly in its own kind. You are
both inhabitants of the same forest, and have learnt to trust
each other.'

KING.

Voluptuaries may allow themselves to be seduced from the path of
duty by falsehoods such as these, expressed in honeyed words.

GAUTAMÍ.

Speak not thus, illustrious Prince. This lady was brought up in a
hermitage, and has never learnt deceit.

KING.

Holy matron,

  E'en in untutored brutes, the female sex
  Is marked by inborn subtlety--much more
  In beings gifted with intelligence.
  The wily Koïl[83], ere towards the sky
  She wings her sportive flight, commits her eggs
  To other nests, and artfully consigns
  The rearing of her little ones to strangers.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.                                          [_Angrily_.

Dishonourable man, thou judgest of others by thine own evil
heart. Thou, at least, art unrivalled in perfidy, and standest
alone--a base deceiver in the garb of virtue and religion--like a
deep pit whose yawning mouth is concealed by smiling flowers.

KING.                                                   [_Aside_.

Her anger, at any rate, appears genuine, and makes me almost
doubt whether I am in the right. For indeed,

  When I had vainly searched my memory,
  And so with stern severity denied
  The fabled story of our secret loves,
  Her brows, that met before in graceful curves,
  Like the arched weapon of the god of love,
  Seemed by her frown dissevered; while the fire
  Of sudden anger kindled in her eyes.

[_Aloud_.]

My good lady, Dushyanta's character is well known to all. I
comprehend not your meaning.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.

Well do I deserve to be thought a harlot for having in the
innocence of my heart, and out of the confidence I reposed in a
Prince of Puru's race, entrusted my honour to a man whose mouth
distils honey, while his heart is full of poison.

       [_Covers her face with her mantle, and bursts into tears_.

[S']ÁRNGARAVA.

Thus it is that burning remorse must ever follow rash actions
which might have been avoided, and for which one has only one's
self to blame.

  Not hastily should marriage be contracted,
  And specially in secret. Many a time,
  In hearts that know not each the other's fancies,
  Fond love is changed into most bitter hate.

KING.

How now! Do you give credence to this woman rather than to me,
that you heap such accusations on me?

[S']ÁRNGARAVA.                                    [_Sarcastically_.

That would be too absurd, certainly. You have heard the
proverb:--

  Hold in contempt the innocent words of those
  Who from their infancy have known no guile;
  But trust the treacherous counsels of the man
  Who makes a very science of deceit.

KING.

Most veracious Bráhman, grant that you are in the right, what end
would be gained by betraying this lady?

[S']ÁRNGARAVA.

Ruin.

KING.

No one will believe that a Prince of Puru's race would seek to
ruin others or himself.

[S']ÁRADWATA.

This altercation is idle, [S']árngarava. We have executed the
commission of our preceptor; come, let us return.

                                                  [_To the_ KING.

  [S']akoontalá is certainly thy bride;
  Receive her or reject her, she is thine.
  Do with her, King, according to thy pleasure--
  The husband o'er the wife is absolute.

Go on before us, Gautamí.

                                               [_They move away_.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.

What! is it not enough to have been betrayed by this perfidious
man? Must you also forsake me, regardless of my tears and
lamentations?

                                      [_Attempts to follow them_.

GAUTAMÍ.                                             [_Stopping_.

My son [S']árngarava, see! [S']akoontalá is following us, and with
tears implores us not to leave her. Alas! poor child, what will
she do here with a cruel husband who casts her from him?

[S']ÁRNGARAVA.

                                  [_Turning angrily towards her_.

Wilful woman, dost thou seek to be independent of thy lord?

                               [[S']AKOONTALÁ _trembles with fear_.

[S']akoontalá!

  If thou art really what the King proclaims thee,
  How can thy father e'er receive thee back
  Into his house and home? but if thy conscience
  Be witness to thy purity of soul,
  E'en should thy husband to a handmaid's lot
  Condemn thee, thou may'st cheerfully endure it.
  When ranked among the number of his household.

Thy duty therefore is to stay. As for us, we must return
immediately.

KING.

Deceive not this lady, my good hermit, by any such expectations.

  The moon expands the lotus of the night,
  The rising sun awakes the lily; each
  Is with his own contented. Even so
  The virtuous man is master of his passions,
  And from another's wife averts his gaze[120].

[S']ÁRNGARAVA.

Since thy union with another woman has rendered thee oblivious of
thy marriage with [S']akoontalá, whence this fear of losing thy
character for constancy and virtue?

KING.                                  [_To his domestic_ PRIEST.

You must counsel me, revered Sir, as to my course of action.
Which of the two evils involves the greater or less sin?

  Whether by some dark veil my mind be clouded.
  Or this designing woman speak untruly,
  I know not. Tell me, must I rather be
  The base disowner of my wedded wife,
  Or the defiling and defiled adulterer?

PRIEST.                                    [_After deliberation_.

You must take an intermediate course.

KING.

What course, revered Sir? Tell me at once.

PRIEST.

I will provide an asylum for the lady in my own house until the
birth of her child; and my reason, if you ask me, is this:
Soothsayers have predicted that your first-born will have
universal dominion. Now, if the hermit's daughter bring forth a
son with the discus or mark of empire in the lines of his
hand[84], you must admit her immediately into your royal
apartments with great rejoicings; if not, then determine to send
her back as soon as possible to her father.

KING.  I bow to the decision of my spiritual advisor.

PRIEST.

Daughter, follow me.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.

O divine earth, open and receive me into thy bosom!

[_Exit_ [S']AKOONTALÁ _weeping, with the_ PRIEST _and the_ HERMITS.
_The_ KING _remains absorbed in thinking of her, though the curse
still clouds his recollection_.

A VOICE BEHIND THE SCENES.

A miracle! a miracle!

KING.

                                                    [_Listening_.

What has happened now?

PRIEST.                  [_Entering with an air of astonishment_.

Great Prince, a stupendous prodigy has just occurred.

KING.

What is it?

PRIEST.

May it please your Majesty, so soon as Kanwa's pupils had
departed, [S']akoontalá, her eyes all bathed in tears, with
outstretched arms, bewailed her cruel fate--

KING.

Well, well, what happened then?

PRIEST.

  When suddenly a shining apparition,
  In female shape, descended from the skies,
  Near the nymph's pool, and bore her up to heaven.

[_All remain motionless with astonishment_.

KING.

My good priest, from the very first I declined having anything to
do with this matter. It is now all over, and we can never, by our
conjectures, unravel the mystery; let it rest; go, seek repose.

PRIEST.

                                          [_Looking at the_ KING.

Be it so. Victory to the King!

                                                         [_Exit_.

KING.

Vetravatí, I am tired out; lead the way to the bedchamber.

WARDER.

This way, Sire.

                                               [_They move away_.

KING.

  Do what I will, I cannot call to mind
  That I did e'er espouse the sage's daughter;
  Therefore I have disowned her; yet 'tis strange
  How painfully my agitated heart
  Bears witness to the truth of her assertion,
  And makes me credit her against my judgment.

                                                       [_Exeunt_.

       *       *       *       *       *




PRELUDE TO ACT VI.

SCENE.--_A Street_.

_Enter the King's brother-in-law as_ SUPERINTENDENT _of the city
police; and with him_ TWO CONSTABLES, _dragging a poor_
FISHERMAN, _who has his hands tied behind his back_.

BOTH THE CONSTABLES.                    [_Striking the prisoner_.

Take that for a rascally thief that you are; and now tell us, sirrah,
where you found this ring--aye, the King's own signet-ring. See, here
is the royal name engraved on the setting of the jewel.

FISHERMAN.                            [_With a gesture of alarm_.

Mercy! kind sirs, mercy! I did not steal it; indeed I did not.

FIRST CONSTABLE.

Oh! then I suppose the King took you for some fine Bráhman, and
made you a present of it?

FISHERMAN.

Only hear me. I am but a poor fisherman, living at Sakrávatára--

SECOND CONSTABLE.

Scoundrel, who ever asked you, pray, for a history of your birth
and parentage?

SUPERINTENDENT.                      [_To one of the_ CONSTABLES.

Súchaka, let the fellow tell his own story from the beginning.
Don't interrupt him.

BOTH CONSTABLES.

As you please, master. Go on, then, sirrah, and say what you've
got to say.

FISHERMAN.

You see in me a poor man, who supports his family by catching
fish with nets, hooks, and the like.

SUPERINTENDENT.                                      [_Laughing_.

A most refined occupation, certainly[85]!

FISHERMAN.

Blame me not for it, master,

  The father's occupation, though despised
  By others, casts no shame upon the son,
  And he should not forsake it[86]. Is the priest
  Who kills the animal for sacrifice
  Therefore deemed cruel? Sure a low-born man
  May, though a fisherman, be tender-hearted.

SUPERINTENDENT.

Well, well; go on with your story.

FISHERMAN.

One day I was cutting open a large carp[87] I had just hooked,
when the sparkle of a jewel caught my eye, and what should I find
in the fish's maw but that ring! Soon afterwards, when I was
offering it for sale, I was seized by your honours. Now you know
everything. Whether you kill me, or whether you let me go, this
is the trues of
outward circumstances. The King's person is as charming as ever,
notwithstanding his sorrow of mind.

  Though but a single golden bracelet spans
  His wasted arm; though costly ornaments
  Have given place to penitential weeds;
  Though oft-repeated sighs have blanched his lips,
  And robbed them of their bloom; though sleepless care
  And carking thought have dimmed his beaming eye;
  Yet does his form, by its inherent lustre,
  Dazzle the gaze; and, like a priceless gem
  Committed to some cunning polisher,
  Grow more effulgent by the loss of substance.

SÁNUMATÍ.                          [_Aside. Looking at the_ KING.

Now that I have seen him, I can well understand why [S']akoontalá
should pine after such a man, in spite of his disdainful
rejection of her.

KING.              [_Walking slowly up and down in deep thought_.

  When fatal lethargy o'erwhelmed my soul,
  My loved one strove to rouse me, but in vain;
  And now, when I would fain in slumber deep
  Forget myself, full soon remorse doth wake me.

SÁNUMATÍ.                                               [_Aside_.

My poor [S']akoontalá's sufferings are very similar.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.                                              [_Aside_.

He is taken with another attack of this odious [S']akoontalá-fever.
How shall we ever cure him?

CHAMBERLAIN.                                      [_Approaching_.

Victory to the King! Great Prince, the royal pleasure-grounds
have been put in order. Your Majesty can resort to them for
exercise and amusement whenever you think proper.

KING.

Vetravatí, tell the worthy Pi[S']una, my prime minister, from me,
that I am so exhausted by want of sleep that I cannot sit on the
judgment-seat to-day. If any case of importance be brought before
the tribunal, he must give it his best attention, and inform me
of the circumstances by letter.

VETRAVATÍ.

Your Majesty's commands shall be obeyed.

                                                         [_Exit_.

KING.                                      [_To the CHAMBERLAIN_.

And you, Vátáyana, may go about your own affairs.

CHAMBERLAIN.

I will, Sire.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

Now that you have rid yourself of these troublesome fellows, you
can enjoy the delightful coolness of your pleasure-grounds
without interruption.

KING.

Ah! my dear friend, there is an old adage:--'When affliction has
a mind to enter, she will find a crevice somewhere;' and it is
verified in me.

  Scarce is my soul delivered from the cloud
  That darkened its remembrance of the past,
  When lo! the heart-born deity of love
  With yonder blossom of the mango barbs
  His keenest shaft, and aims it at my breast.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

Well, then, wait a moment; I will soon demolish Master Káma's[47]
arrow with a cut of my cane.

           [_Raises his stick and strikes off the mango-blossom_.

KING.                                                 [_Smiling_.

That will do. I see very well the god of love is not a match for
a Bráhman. And now, my dear friend, where shall I sit down, that
I may enchant my sight by gazing on the twining plants, which
seem to remind me of the graceful shape of my beloved?

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

Don't you remember? you told your personal attendant, Chaturiká,
that you would pass the heat of the day in the jasmine-bower; and
commanded her to bring the likeness of your queen [S']akoontalá,
sketched with your own hand.

KING.

True. The sight of her picture will refresh my soul. Lead the way
to the arbour.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

This way, Sire.

                           [_Both move on, followed by_ SÁNUMATÍ.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

Here we are at the jasmine-bower. Look, it has a marble seat, and
seems to bid us welcome with its offerings of delicious flowers.
You have only to enter and sit down.

                               [_Both enter and seat themselves_.

SÁNUMATÍ

[_Aside_.

I will lean against these young jasmines. I can easily, from
behind them, glance at my friend's picture, and will then hasten
to inform her of her husband's ardent affection.

                          [_Stands leaning against the creepers_.

KING.

Oh! my dear friend, how vividly all the circumstances of my union
with [S']akoontalá present themselves to my recollection at this
moment! But tell me now how it was that, between the time of my
leaving her in the hermitage and my subsequent rejection of her,
you never breathed her name to me? True, you were not by my side
when I disowned her; but I had confided to you the story of my
love, and you were acquainted with every particular. Did it pass
out of your mind as it did out of mine?

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

No, no; trust me for that. But, if you remember, when you had
finished telling me about it, you added that I was not to take
the story in earnest, for that you were not really in love with a
country girl, but were only jesting; and I was dull and
thick-headed enough to believe you. But so fate decreed, and
there is no help for it.

SÁNUMATÍ.                                               [_Aside_.

Exactly.

KING.                                      [_After deep thought_.

My dear friend, suggest some relief for my misery.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

Come, come, cheer up; why do you give way? Such weakness is
unworthy of you. Great men never surrender themselves to
uncontrolled grief. Do not mountains remain unshaken even in a
gale of wind?

KING.

How can I be otherwise than inconsolable, when I call to mind the
agonized demeanour of the dear one on the occasion of my
disowning her?

  When cruelly I spurned her from my presence,
  She fain had left me; but the young recluse,
  Stern as the Sage, and with authority
  As from his saintly master, in a voice
  That brooked not contradiction, bade her stay.
  Then through her pleading eyes, bedimmed with tears,
  She cast on me one long reproachful look,
  Which like a poisoned shaft torments me still.

SÁNUMATÍ.                                               [_Aside_.

Alas! such is the force of self-reproach following a rash
action. But his anguish only rejoices me.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA

An idea has just struck me. I should not wonder if some celestial
being had carried her off to heaven.

KING.

Very likely. Who else would have dared to lay a finger on a wife,
the idol of her husband? It is said that Menaká, the nymph of
heaven, gave her birth. The suspicion has certainly crossed my
mind that some of her celestial companions may have taken her to
their own abode.

SÁNUMATÍ.                                               [_Aside_.

His present recollection of every circumstance of her history
does not surprise me so much as his former forgetfulness.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

If that's the case, you will be certain to meet her before long.

KING.

Why?

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

No father and mother can endure to see a daughter suffering the
pain of separation from her husband.

KING. Oh! my dear Má[T.]Havya,

  Was it a dream? or did some magic dire,
  Dulling my senses with a strange delusion,
  O'ercome my spirit? or did destiny,
  Jealous of my good actions, mar their fruit,
  And rob me of their guerdon? It is past,
  Whate'er the spell that bound me. Once again
  Am I awake, but only to behold
  The precipice o'er which my hopes have fallen.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

Do not despair in this manner. Is not this very ring a proof that
what has been lost may be unexpectedly found?

KING.                                      [_Gazing at the ring_.

Ah! this ring, too, has fallen from a station not easily
regained, and I offer it my sympathy. O gem,

  The punishment we suffer is deserved,
  And equal is the merit of our works,
  When such our common doom. Thou didst enjoy
  The thrilling contact of those slender fingers,
  Bright as the dawn; and now how changed thy lot!

SÁNUMATÍ.                                               [_Aside_.

Had it found its way to the hand of any other person, then indeed
its fate would have been deplorable.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

Pray, how did the ring ever come upon her hand at all?

SÁNUMATÍ.                                               [_Aside_.

I myself am curious to know.

KING.

You shall hear. When I was leaving my beloved [S']akoontalá that I
might return to my own capital, she said to me, with tears in her
eyes: 'How long will it be ere my lord send for me to his palace
and make me his queen?'

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

Well, what was your reply?

KING.

Then I placed the ring on her finger, and thus addressed her:--

Repeat each day one letter of the name Engraven on this gem; ere
thou hast reckoned The tale of syllables, my minister Shall come
to lead thee to thy husband's palace.

But, hard-hearted man that I was, I forgot to fulfil my promise,
owing to the infatuation that took possession of me.

SÁNUMATÍ.                                               [_Aside_.

A pleasant arrangement! Fate, however, ordained that the
appointment should not be kept.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

But how did the ring contrive to pass into the stomach of that
carp which the fisherman caught and was cutting up?

KING.

It must have slipped from my [S']akoontalá's hand, and fallen into
the stream of the Ganges, while she was offering homage to the
water of [S']achí's holy pool.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

Very likely.

SÁNUMATÍ.                                               [_Aside_.

Hence it happened, I suppose, that the King, always fearful of
committing the least injustice, came to doubt his marriage with
my poor [S']akoontalá. But why should affection so strong as his
stand in need of any token of recognition?

KING.

Let me now address a few words of reproof to this ring.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.                                              [_Aside_.

He is going stark mad, I verily believe.

KING.

  Hear me, then dull and undiscerning bauble!
  For so it argues thee, that thou could'st leave
  The slender fingers of her hand, to sink
  Beneath the waters. Yet what marvel is it
  That thou should'st lack discernment? let me rather
  Heap curses on myself, who, thoughted the ceremonies usual
upon such expectations.

KING.

The unborn child has a title to its father's property. Such is my
decree. Go, bid my minister proclaim it so.

VETRAVATÍ.

I will, my liege.

                                                        [_Going_.

KING.

Stay a moment.

VETRAVATÍ.

I am at your Majesty's service.

KING.

Let there be no question whether he may or may not have left
offspring; Rather be it proclaimed that whosoe'er Of King
Dushyanta's subjects be bereaved

  Of any loved relation, an it be not
  That his estates are forfeited for crimes,
  Dushyanta will himself to them supply
  That kinsman's place in tenderest affection.

VETRAVATÍ.

It shall be so proclaimed.

            [_Exit_ VETRAVATÍ, _and re-enters after an interval_.

VETRAVATÍ.

Your Majesty's proclamation was received with acclamations of
joy, like grateful rain at the right season.

KING.                                     [_Drawing a deep sigh_.

So, then, the property of rich men, who have no lineal
descendants, passes over to a stranger at their decease. And
such, alas! must be the fate of the fortunes of the race of Puru
at my death; even as when fertile soil is sown with seed at the
wrong season.

VETRAVATÍ.

Heaven forbid!

KING.

Fool that I was to reject such happiness when it offered itself
for my acceptance!

SÁNUMATÍ.                                               [_Aside_.

He may well blame his own folly when he calls to mind his
treatment of my beloved [S']akoontalá.

KING.

  Ah! woe is me! when I forsook my wife--
  My lawful wife--concealed within her breast
  There lay my second self, a child unborn,
  Hope of my race, e'en as the choicest fruit
  Lies hidden in the bosom of the earth.

SÁNUMATÍ. [_Aside_.

There is no fear of your race being cut off for want of a son.

CHATURIKÁ. [_Aside to_ VETRAVATÍ.

The affair of the merchant's death has quite upset our royal
master, and caused him sad distress. Would it not be better to
fetch the worthy Má[t.]havya from the Palace of Clouds to comfort
him?

VETRAVATÍ.

A very good idea.

                                                         [_Exit_.

KING.

Alas! the shades of my forefathers are even now beginning to be
alarmed, lest at my death they may be deprived of their funeral
libations.

  No son remains in King Dushyanta's place
  To offer sacred homage to the dead
  Of Puru's noble line; my ancestors
  Must drink these glistening tears, the last libation[99]
  A childless man can ever hope to make them.

                              [_Falls down in an agony of grief_.

CHATURIKÁ.                    [_Looking at him in consternation_.

Great King, compose yourself.

SÁNUMATÍ.                                               [_Aside_.

Alas! alas! though a bright light is shining near him, he is
involved in the blackest darkness, by reason of the veil that
obscures his sight. I will now reveal all, and put an end to his
misery. But no; I heard the mother of the great Indra[100], when
she was consoling [S']akoontalá, say that the gods will soon bring
about a joyful union between husband and wife, being eager for
the sacrifice which will be celebrated in their honour on the
occasion. I must not anticipate the happy moment, but will return
at once to my dear friend and cheer her with an account of what I
have seen and heard. [_Rises aloft and disappears_.

A VOICE BEHIND THE SCENES.

Help! help! to the rescue!

KING.

                                [_Recovering himself. Listening_.

Ha! I heard a cry of distress, and in Má[t.]havya's voice too. What
ho there!

VETRAVATÍ.                                           [_Entering_.

Your friend is in danger; save him, great King.

KING.

Who dares insult the worthy Má[t.]havya?

VETRAVATÍ.

Some evil demon, invisible to human eyes, has seized him, and
carried him to one of the turrets of the Palace of Clouds.

KING.                                                  [_Rising_.

  Impossible! Have evil spirits power over my subjects,
  even in nay private apartments? Well, well;--
  Daily I seem, less able to avert
  Misfortune from myself, and o'er my actions
  Less competent to exercise control;
  How can I then direct my subjects' ways,
  Or shelter them from tyranny and wrong?

A VOICE BEHIND THE SCENES.

Halloo there! my dear friend; help! help!

KING.                            [_Advancing with rapid strides_.

Fear nothing--

THE SAME VOICE BEHIND THE SCENES.

Fear nothing, indeed! How can I help fearing when some monster is
twisting back my neck, and is about to snap it as he would a
sugar-cane?

KING.                                           [_Looking round_.
What ho there! my bow!

SLAVE.                               [_Entering with a bow_.

Behold your bow, Sire, and your arm-guard.

[_The_ KING _snatches up the bow and arrows_.

ANOTHER VOICE BEHIND THE SCENES.

  Here, thirsting for thy life-blood, will I slay thee,
  As a fierce tiger rends his struggling prey.
  Call now thy friend Dushyanta to thy aid;
  His bow is mighty to defend the weak;
  Yet all its vaunted power shall be as nought.

KING.                                               [_With fury_.

What! dares he defy me to my face? Hold there, monster! Prepare
to die, for your time is come.

[_Stringing his bow_.]

Vetravatí, lead the way to the terrace.

VETRAVATÍ.

This way, Sire.

                                        [_They advance in haste_.

KING.                                   [_Looking on every side_.

How's this? there is nothing to be seen.

A VOICE BEHIND THE SCENES.

Help! Save me! I can see you, though you cannot see me. I am like
a mouse in the claws of a cat; my life is not worth a minute's
purchase.

KING.

  Avaunt, monster! You may pride yourself on the
  magic that renders you invisible, but my arrow shall
  find you out. Thus do I fix a shaft
  That shall discern between an impious demon,
  And a good Bráhman; bearing death to thee,
  To him deliverance--even as the swan
  Distinguishes the milk from worthless water[101].

                                                    [_Takes aim_.

_Enter_ MÁTALI[102] _holding_ MÁ[T.]HAVYA, _whom he releases_.

MÁTALI.

  Turn thou thy deadly arrows on the demons;
  Such is the will of Indra; let thy bow
  Be drawn against the enemies of the gods;
  But on thy friends cast only looks of favour.

KING.                                  [_Putting back his arrow_.

What, Mátali! Welcome, most noble charioteer of the mighty Indra.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

So, here is a monster who thought as little about slaughtering me
as if I had been a bullock for sacrifice, and you must e'en greet
him with a welcome.

MÁTALI.                                               [_Smiling_.

Great Prince, hear on what errand Indra sent me into your
presence.

KING.

I am all attention.

MÁTALI.

There is a race of giants, the descendants of Kálanemi[103], whom
the gods find it difficult to subdue.

KING.

So I have already heard from Nárada[104].

MÁTALI.

  Heaven's mighty lord, who deigns to call thee 'friend,'
  Appoints thee to the post of highest honour,
  As leader of his armies; and commits
  The subjugation of this giant brood
  To thy resistless arms, e'en as the sun
  Leaves the pale moon to dissipate the darkness.

Let your Majesty, therefore, ascend at once the celestial car of
Indra; and, grasping your arms, advance to victory.

KING.

The mighty Indra honours me too highly by such a mark of
distinction. But tell me, what made you act thus towards my poor
friend Má[T.]Havya?

MÁTALI.

  I will tell you. Perceiving that your Majesty's
  spirit was completely broken by some distress of mind
  under which you were labouring, I determined to
  rouse your energies by moving you to anger. Because
  To light a flame, we need but stir the embers;
  The cobra, when incensed, extends his head
  And springs upon his foe; the bravest men
  Display their courage only when provoked.

KING.                                      [_Aside to_ MÁ[T.]HAVYA.

My dear Má[T.]Havya, the commands of the great Indra must not be
left unfulfilled. Go you and acquaint my minister, Pi[S']una, with
what has happened, and say to him from me:--

  Dushyanta to thy care confides his realm--
  Protect with all the vigour of thy mind
  The interests of his people; while his bow
  Is braced against the enemies of heaven.

MÁ[T.]HAVYA.
I obey.                                                  [_Exit_.

MÁTALI

Ascend, illustrious Prince.

                                   [_The_ KING _ascends the car_.

                                                       [_Exeunt_.

       *       *       *       *       *




ACT VII.


SCENE.--_The Sky_.

_Enter_ KING DUSHYANTA _and_ MÁTALI _in the car of Indra, moving
in the air_.

KING.

My good Mátali, it appears to me incredible that I can merit such
a mark of distinction for having simply fulfilled the behests of
the great Indra.

MÁTALI.                                               [_Smiling_.

Great Prince, it seems to me that neither of you is satisfied
with himself.

  You underrate the services you have rendered,
  And think too highly of the god's reward;
  He deems it scarce sufficient recompense
  For your heroic deeds on his behalf.

KING.

Nay, Mátali, say not so. My most ambitious expectations were more
than realised by the honour conferred on me at the moment when I
took my leave. For,

  Tinged with celestial sandal, from the breast[105]
  Of the great Indra, where before it hung,
  A garland of the ever-blooming tree
  Of Nandana[106] was cast about my neck
  By his own hand; while, in the very presence
  Of the assembled gods, I was enthroned
  Beside their mighty lord, who smiled to see
  His son Jayanta[107] envious of the honour.

MÁTALI.

There is no mark of distinction which your Majesty does not
deserve at the hands of the immortals. See,

  Heaven's hosts acknowledge thee their second saviour:
  For now thy how's unerr                                               [_Exit_.

CHILD.

No, no; I shall go on playing with the young lion.

[_Looks at the_ FEMALE ATTENDANT _and laughs_.

KING.

  I feel an unaccountable affection for this wayward child.
  How blessed the virtuous parents whose attire
  Is soiled with dust, by raising from the ground
  The child that asks a refuge in their arms!
  And happy are they while with lisping prattle,
  In accents sweetly inarticulate,
  He charms their ears; and with his artless smiles
  Gladdens their hearts[119], revealing to their gaze
  His pearly teeth just budding into view.

ATTENDANT.

I see how it is. He pays me no manner of attention.

[_Looking off the stage_.]

I wonder whether any of the hermits are about here.

[_ Seeing the_ KING.]

Kind Sir, could you come hither a moment and help me to release
the young lion from the clutch of this child who is teasing him
in boyish play?

KING.                                 [_Approaching and smiling_.

Listen to me, thou child of a mighty saint!

  Dost thou dare show a wayward spirit here?
  Here, in this hallowed region? Take thou heed
  Lest, as the serpent's young defiles the sandal[71],
  Thou bring dishonour on the holy sage
  Thy tender-hearted parent, who delights
  To shield from harm the tenants of the wood.

ATTENDANT.

Gentle Sir, I thank you; but he is not the saint's son.

KING.

His behaviour and whole bearing would have led me to doubt it,
had not the place of his abode encouraged the idea.

   [_Follows the_ CHILD, _and takes him by the hand, according to
                            the request of the attendant. Aside_.

  I marvel that the touch of this strange child
  Should thrill me with delight; if so it be,
  How must the fond caresses of a son
  Transport the father's soul who gave him being!

ATTENDANT.                               [_Looking at them both_.

Wonderful! Prodigious!

KING.

What excites your surprise, my good woman?

ATTENDANT.

I am astonished at the striking resemblance between the child and
yourself; and, what is still more extraordinary, he seems to have
taken to you kindly and submissively, though you are a stranger
to him.

KING.                                      [_Fondling the_ CHILD.

If he be not the son of the great sage, of what family does he
come, may I ask?

ATTENDANT.

Of the race of Puru.

KING.                                                   [_Aside_.

What! are we, then, descended from the same ancestry? This, no
doubt, accounts for the resemblance she traces between the child
and me. Certainly it has always been an established usage among
the princes of Puru's race,

  To dedicate the morning of their days
  To the world's weal, in palaces and halls,
  'Mid luxury and regal pomp abiding;
  Then, in the wane of life, to seek release
  From kingly cares, and make the hallowed shade
  Of sacred trees their last asylum, where
  As hermits they may practise self-abasement,
  And bind themselves by rigid vows of penance.

[_Aloud_.]

But how could mortals by their own power gain admission to this
sacred region?

ATTENDANT.

Your remark is just; but your wonder will cease when I tell you
that his mother is the offspring of a celestial nymph, and gave
him birth in the hallowed grove of Ka[s']yapa.

KING.                                                   [_Aside_.

Strange that my hopes should be again excited!

[_Aloud_.]

But what, let me ask, was the name of the prince whom she deigned
to honour with her hand?

ATTENDANT.

How could I think of polluting my lips by the mention of a wretch
who had the cruelty to desert his lawful wife?

KING.                                                   [_Aside_.

Ha! the description suits me exactly. Would I could bring myself
to inquire the name of the child's mother!

[_Reflecting_.]

But it is against propriety to make too minute inquiries about
the wife of another man[120].

FIRST ATTENDANT.

                  [_Entering with the china peacock in her hand_.

Sarva-damana, Sarva-damana, see, see, what a beautiful [S']akoonta
(bird).

CHILD.                                          [_Looking round_.

My mother! Where? Let me go to her.

BOTH ATTENDANTS.

He mistook the word [S']akoonta for [S']akoontalá. The boy dotes upon
his mother, and she is ever uppermost in his thoughts.

SECOND ATTENDANT.

Nay, my dear child, I said: Look at the beauty of this [S']akoonta.

KING.                                                   [_Aside_.

What! is his mother's name [S']akoontalá? But the name is not
uncommon among women. Alas! I fear the mere similarity of a name,
like the deceitful vapour of the desert[94], has once more raised
my hopes only to dash them to the ground.

CHILD.

Dear nurse, what a beautiful peacock!

                                                [_Takes the toy_.

FIRST ATTENDANT.

                      [_Looking at the CHILD. In great distress_.

Alas! alas! I do not see the amulet on his wrist.

KING.

Don't distress yourself. Here it is. It fell off while he was
struggling with the young lion.

                                         [_Stoops to pick it up_.

BOTH ATTENDANTS.

Hold! hold! Touch it not, for your life. How marvellous! He has
actually taken it up without the slightest hesitation.

 [_Both raise their hands to their breasts and look at each other
                                                in astonishment_.

KING.

Why did you try to prevent my touching it?

FIRST ATTENDANT.

Listen, great Monarch. This amulet, known as 'The Invincible,'
was given to the boy by the divine son of Maríchi, soon after his
birth, when the natal ceremony was performed. Its peculiar virtue
is, that when it falls on the ground, no one except the father or
mother of the child can touch it unhurt.

KING.

And suppose another person touches it?

FIRST ATTENDANT.

Then it instantly becomes a serpent, and bites him.

KING.

Have you ever witnessed the transformation with your own eyes?

BOTH ATTENDANTS.

Over and over again.

KING.                                     [_With rapture. Aside_.

Joy! joy! Are then my dearest hopes to be fulfilled?

                                           [_Embraces the CHILD_.

SECOND ATTENDANT.

Come, my dear Suvratá, we must inform [S']akoontalá immediately of
this wonderful event, though we have to interrupt her in the
performance of her religious vows.

                                                       [_Exeunt_.

CHILD.                                            [_To the_ KING.

Don't hold me. I want to go to my mother.

KING.

We will go to her together, and give her joy, my son.

CHILD.

Dushyanta is my father, not you.

KING.                                                 [_Smiling_.

His contradiction only convinces me the more.

_Enter_ [S']AKOONTALÁ, _in widow's apparel, with her long hair
twisted into a single braid_.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.                                            [_Aside_.

I have just heard that Sarva-damana's amulet has retained its
form, though a stranger raised it from the ground. I can hardly
believe in my good fortune. Yet why should not Sánumatí's
prediction be verified?

KING.

Alas! can this indeed be my [S']akoontalá?

  Clad in the weeds of widowhood, her face
  Emaciate with fasting, her long hair
  Twined in a single braid[121], her whole demeanour
  Expressive of her purity of soul;
  With patient constancy she thus prolongs
  The vow to which my cruelty condemned her.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.   [_Gazing at the_ KING, _who is pale with remorse_.

Surely this is not like my husband; yet who can it be that dares
pollute by the pressure of his hand my child, whose amulet should
protect him from a stranger's touch?

CHILD.                                    [_Going to his mother_.

Mother, who is this man that has been kissing me and calling me
his son?

KING.

My best beloved, I have indeed treated thee most cruelly, but am
now once more thy fond and affectionate lover. Refuse not to
acknowledge me as thy husband.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.                                            [_Aside_.

Be of good cheer, my heart. The anger of Destiny is at last
appeased. Heaven regards thee with compassion. But is he in very
truth my husband?

KING.

  Behold me, best and loveliest of women,
  Delivered from the cloud of fatal darkness
  That erst oppressed my memory. Again
  Behold us brought together by the grace
  Of the great lord of Heaven. So the moon
  Shines forth from dim eclipse [122], to blend his rays
  With the soft lustre of his Rohiní.

[S']AKOONTALÁ.

May my husband be victorious--

                 [_She stops short, her voice choked with tears_.

KING.

  O fair one, though the utterance of thy prayer
  Be lost amid the torrent of thy tears,
  Yet does the sight of thy fair countenance
  And of thy pallid lips, all unadorned[123]
  And colourless in sorrow for my absence,
  Make me already more than conqueror.

CHILD.

Mother, who is this man?

[S']AKOONTALÁ.

My child, ask the deity that presides over thy destiny.

KING.                         [_Falling at_ [S']AKOONTALÁ's _feet_.

  Fairest of women, banish from thy mind
  The memory of my cruelty; reproach
  The fell delusion that o'erpowered my soul,
  And blame not me, thy husband; 'tis the curse
  Of him in whom the power of darkness[124] reigns,
  That he mistakes the gifts of those he loves
  For deadly evils. Even though a friend
  Should wreathe a garland on a blind man's brow,
  Will he not cast it from him as a serpent?

[S']AKOONTALÁ.

Rise, my own husband, rise. Thou wast not to blame. My own evil
deeds, committed in a former state of being[37], brought down
this judgment upon me. How else could my husband, who was ever of
a compassionate disposition, have acted so unfeelingly?

[_The_ KING _rises_.]

But tell me, my husband, how did the remembrance of thine
unfortunate wife return to thy mind?

KING.

As soon as my heart's anguish is removed, and its wounds are
healed, I will tell thee all.

ther, I will strive, as far as I am able, to attain this
happiness.

KA[S']YAPA.

What other favour can I bestow on thee, my son?

KING.

What other can I desire? If, however, you permit me to form
another wish, I would humbly beg that the saying of the sage
Bharata[130] be fulfilled:

  May kings reign only for their subjects' weal;
  May the divine Saraswatí[131], the source
  Of speech, and goddess of dramatic art,
  Be ever honoured by the great and wise;
  And may the purple self-existent god[132],
  Whose vital Energy[133] pervades all space,
  From future transmigrations save my soul.


                                                 [_Exeunt omnes_.




NOTES:


1. _Í[S']a preserve you_.

That is, 'the Lord,' a name given to the god Siva, when regarded as
supreme. As presiding over dissolution he is associated with Brahmá
the Creator, and Vishnu the Preserver; constituting with them the
Hindú Triad. Kálidása indulges the religious predilections of his
fellow-townsmen by beginning and ending the play with a prayer to
[S']iva, who had a large temple in Ujjayiní, the modern Oujein, the city
of Vikramáditya, situated north-eastward from Gujarát.

2. _In these eight forms_.

The worshippers of Siva, who were Pantheists in the sense of
believing that [S']iva was himself all that exists, as well as the
cause of all that is, held that there were eight different
manifestations of their god, called Rudras; and that these had
their types in the eight visible forms enumerated here. The
Hindús reckon five elements. The most subtle is Ether (_ákása_),
supposed to convey sound, which is its peculiar attribute or
property (_guna_). The next element--Air, has for its properties
sound and feeling. The third--Fire, has sound, feeling, and
colour. The fourth--Water, has sound, feeling, colour, and taste.
The fifth--Earth, has all the other properties, with the addition
of smell.

3. _An audience of educated and discerning men_.

Lit. 'An audience, who are chiefly men of education and discernment.'
Few could have been present at these dramatic representations excepting
learned and educated men. The mass of the composition being in Sanskrit,
would not have been intelligible to the vulgar and illiterate.

4. _[S']akoontalá; or, The Lost Ring_.

The literal title is '[S']akoontalá recognized by the token or
ring.'

5. _The present Summer season_.

Hindú poets divide the year into six seasons of two months each,
viz. I. Spring (Vasanta), beginning about the middle of March;
or, according to some, February. 2. Summer (Gríshma). 3. Rains
(Varsha). 4. Autumn (Sarad). 5. Winter (Hemanta). 6. Dews
(Sisira). Practically, however, there are only three seasons in
India, 1. The hot season. 2. The rains. 3. The cold weather. In
Lower Bengal and Behar, the first of these seasons begins in
March, the second in June, and the third in November. The
temperature of the cold season is highly exhilarating, and the
climate is then superior to that of any portion of the English
year. In Calcutta, this season continues for about three months;
in Upper India, for about five; and in the Panjáb for about
seven. The rains in Bengal Proper are more violent and protracted
than in Hindústán and the Panjáb. In the latter country they last
for hardly more than two months, and even then only fall at
intervals. Plays were acted on solemn and festive occasions, on
lunar holidays, and especially at the changes of the season.

6. _Of fragrant Pátalas_.

The Pátala or trumpet-flower; _Bignonia suaveolens_.

7. _With sweet [S']irísha flowers_.

The flowers of the _Acacia Sírisha_ were used by the Hindú women
as ear-ornaments.

8. _King Dushyanta_.

For the genealogy of King Dushyanta see Introduction, page
xxxviii.

9. _That wields the trident_.

[S']iva is called Pinákin, that is, 'armed with a trident,' or
according to some, a bow named Pináka. Siva not being invited to
Daksha's sacrifice, was so indignant, that, with his wife, he
suddenly presented himself, confounded the sacrifice, dispersed
the gods, and chasing Yajna, 'the lord of sacrifice,' who fled in
the form of a deer, overtook and decapitated him.

10.        _Their waving plumes, that late
    Fluttered above their brows, are motionless._

The Chámarí, or chowrie, formed of the white bushy tail of the
Yak, or _Bos grunniens_, was placed as an ornament between the
ears of horses, like the plume of the war-horse of chivalry. The
velocity of the chariot caused it to lose its play, and appear
fixed in one direction, like a flag borne rapidly against the
wind.

11. _The steeds of Indra and the Sun._

That is, the speed of the chariot resembled that of the Wind and
the Sun. Indra was the god of the firmament or atmosphere--the
Jupiter Tonans of Hindú mythology--and presided over the
forty-nine Winds. He has a heaven of his own (Swarga), of which
he is the lord, and, although inferior to the three great deities
of the Hindú Triad (Brahmá, Vishnu, and Siva), he is chief of the
secondary gods. The Hindús represent the Sun as seated in a
chariot, drawn by seven green horses, having before him a lovely
youth without legs, who acts as his charioteer, and who is Aruna,
or the Dawn personified.

12. _Puru's race_.

See Dushyanta's pedigree detailed at page xxxviii of the
Introduction.

13. _The great sage Kanwa_.

The sage Kanwa was a descendant of Kasyapa, whom the Hindús
consider to have been the father of the inferior gods, demons,
man, fish, reptiles, and all animals, by his twelve wives. Kanwa
was the chief of a number of devotees, or hermits, who had
constructed a hermitage on the banks of the river Máliní, and
surrounded it with gardens and groves, where penitential rites
were performed, and animals were reared for sacrificial purposes,
or for the amusement of the inmates. There is nothing new in
asceticism. The craving after self-righteousness, and the desire
of acquiring merit by self-mortification, is an innate principle
of the human heart, and ineradicable even by Christianity.
Witness the monastic institutions of the Romish Church, of which
Indian penance-groves were the type. The Superior of a modern
Convent is but the antitype of Kanwa; and what is Romanism but
humanity developing itself in some of its most inveterate
propensities?

14. _He has gone to Soma tírtha_.

A place of pilgrimage in the west of India, on the coast of
Gujarát, near the temple of Somanáth, or Somnát, made notorious
by its gates, which were brought back from Ghazní by Lord
Ellenborough's orders in 1842, and are now to be seen in the
arsenal at Agra. These places of pilgrimage were generally fixed
on the bank of some sacred stream, or in the vicinity of some
holy spring. The word _tírtha_ is derived from a Sanskrit root,
_trí_, 'to cross,' implying that the river has to be passed
through, either for the washing away of sin, or extrication from
some adverse destiny. Thousands of devotees still flock to the
most celebrated Tírthas on the Ganges, at Benares, Haridwár, etc.

15. _Ingudí_.

A tree, commonly called Ingua, or Jiyaputa, from the fruit of
which oil was extracted, which the devotees used for their lamps
and for ointment. One synonym for this tree is _tápasa-taru_,
'the anchorite's tree.'

16. _Bark-woven vests_.

Dresses made of bark, worn by ascetics, were washed in water, and
then suspended to dry on the branches of trees.

17. _By deep canals_.

It was customary to dig trenches round the roots of trees, to
collect the rain-water.

18. _My throbbing arm_.

A quivering sensation in the right arm was supposed by the Hindús
to prognosticate union with a beautiful woman. Throbbings of the
arm or eyelid, if felt on the right side, were omens of good
fortune in men; if on the left, bad omens. The reverse was true
of women.  19. _The hard acacia's stem_.

The Samí tree, a kind of acacia (_Acacia Suma_), the wood of
which is very hard, and supposed by the Hindús to contain fire.

20. _The lotus_.

This beautiful plant, the varieties of which, white, blue, and
red, are numerous, bears some resemblance to our water-lily. It
is as favourite a subject of allusion and comparison with Hindú
poets as the rose is with Persian.

21. _With the Saivala entwined_.

The [S']aivala (_Vallisneria_) is an aquatic plant, which spreads
itself over ponds, and interweaves itself with the lotus. The
interlacing of its stalks is compared in poetry to braided hair.

22. _Yon Ke[s']ara tree_.

The Ke[s']ara tree (_Mimusops elengi_) is the same as the Bakula,
frequent mention of which is made is some of the Puránas. It
bears a strong-smelling flower, which, according to Sir W. Jones,
is ranked among the flowers of the Hindú paradise. The tree Is
very ornamental in pleasure-grounds.

23. _Would that my union with her were permissible_.

A Bráhman might marry a woman of the military or kingly class
next below him, and the female offspring of such a marriage would
belong to a mixed caste, and might be lawfully solicited in
marriage by a man of the military class. But if [S']akoontalá were
a pure Bráhmaní woman, both on the mother's and father's side,
she would be ineligible as the wife of a Kshatriya king.
Dushyanta discovers afterwards that she was, in fact, the
daughter of the great Vi[s']wámitra (see note 27), who was of the
same caste as himself, though her mother was the nymph Menaká.

24. _I trust all is well with your devotional rites_.

This was the regular formula of salutation addressed to persons
engaged in religions exercises.

25. _This water that we have brought with us will serve to bathe
our guest's feet_.

Water for the feet is one of the first things invariably provided
for a guest in all Eastern countries. Compare Genesis xxiv. 32;
Luke vii. 44. If the guest were a Bráhman, or a man of rank, a
respectful offering (_argha_) of rice, fruit, and flowers was
next presented. In fact, the rites of hospitality in India were
enforced by very stringent regulations. The observance of t him with love for his
wife, Párvatí. [S']iva happened then to be practising austerities,
and intent on a vow of chastity. He therefore cursed the god of
love in a terrible voice, and at the same time a flash from his
eye caused the god's body to shrivel into ashes. Thus Káma was
made incorporeal, and from that time was called 'the bodiless
one.'

49.
                    _Like the flame,
  That ever hidden in the secret depths
  Of ocean, smoulders there unseen_.

This submarine fire was called Aurva,
from the following fable. The Rishi Aurva, who had gained great
power by his austerities, was pressed by the gods and others to
perpetuate his race. He consented, but warned them that his
offspring would consume the world. Accordingly, he created from
his thigh a devouring fire, which, as soon as it was produced,
demanded nourishment, and would have destroyed the whole earth,
had not Brahmá appeared and assigned the ocean as its habitation,
and the waves as its food. The spot where it entered the sea was
called 'the mare's mouth.' Doubtless the story was invented to
suit the phenomenon of some marine volcano, which may have
exhaled through the water bituminous inflammable gas, and which,
perhaps in the form of a horse's mouth, was at times visible
above the sea.

50 _Who on his 'scutcheon bears the monster-fish_.

The Hindú Cupid is said to have subdued a marine monster, which
was, therefore, painted on his banner.

51 _The graceful undulation of her gait_.

_Hansa-gáminí_, 'walking like a swan,' was an epithet for a
graceful woman. The Indian lawgiver, Manu, recommends that a
Bráhman should choose for his wife a young maiden, whose gait was
like that of a phoenicopter, or flamingo, or even like that of a
young elephant. The idea in the original is, that the weight of
her hips had caused the peculiar appearance observable in the
print of her feet. Largeness of the hips was considered a great
beauty in Hindú women, and would give an undulatory motion to
their walk.  52 _The Mádhaví_.

A large and beautiful creeper (_Gaertnera racemosa_), bearing
white, fragrant flowers, to which constant allusion is made in
Sanskrit plays.

53 _Pines to be united with the Moon_.

A complete revolution of the moon, with respect to the stars, being
made in twenty-seven days, odd hours, the Hindús divide the heavens
into twenty-seven constellations (asterisms) or lunar stations, one
of which receives the moon for one day in each of his monthly journeys.
As the Moon, Chandra, is considered to be a masculine deity, the Hindús
fable these twenty-seven constellations as his wives, and personify
them as the daughters of Daksha. Of these twenty-seven wives, twelve
of whom give names to the twelve months, Chandra is supposed to show
the greatest affection for the fourth, Rohiní; but each of the others,
and amongst them Vi[s']ákhá, is represented as jealous of this
partiality, and eager to secure the Moon's favour for herself,
Dushyanta probably means to compare himself to the Moon (he being of
the Lunar race) and [S']akoontalá to Vi[s']ákhá.

54. _Checks its fall_.

Owing to emaciation and disuse of the bow, the callosities on the
forearm, usually caused by the bow-string, were not sufficiently
prominent to prevent the bracelet from slipping down from the
wrist to the elbow, when the arm was raised to support the head.
This is a favourite idea with Kálidása to express the attenuation
caused by love.

55. _No nuptial rites prevail_.

A marriage without the usual ceremonies is called Gándharva. It
was supposed to be the form of marriage prevalent among the
nymphs of India's heaven. In the 3rd Book of Manu (v. 22), it is
included among the various marriage rites, and is said to be a
union proceeding entirely from love, or mutual inclination, and
concluded without any religious services, and without consulting
relatives. It was recognized as a legal marriage by Manu and
other lawgivers, though it is difficult to say in what respect it
differed from unlawful cohabitation.

56. _The loving birds doomed by fate to nightly separation_.

That is, the male and female of the Chakraváka, commonly called Chakwa
and Chakwí, or Bráhmaní duck (_Anas casarca_). These birds associate
together during the day, and are, like turtle-doves, patterns of
connubial affection; but the legend is, that they are doomed to pass
the night apart, in consequence of a curse pronounced upon them by a
saint whom they had offended. As soon as night commences, they take
up their station on the opposite banks of a river, and call to each
other in piteous cries. The Bengálís consider their flesh to be a good
medicine for fever.

57. _The great sage Durvásas_.

A Saint or Muni, represented by the Hindú poets as excessively
choleric and inexorably severe. The Puránas and other poems
contain frequent accounts of the terrible effects of his
imprecations on various occasions, the slightest offence being in
his eyes deserving of the most fearful punishment. On one
occasion he cursed Indra, merely because his elephant let fall a
garland he had given to this god; and in consequence of this
imprecation all plants withered, men ceased to sacrifice, and the
gods were overcome in their wars with the demons.

58. _Propitiatory offering_.

Compare note 25.

59. _His blushing charioteer_.

Compare note 11.

60. _Night-loving lotus_.

Some species of the lotus, especially the white esculent kind,
open their petals during the night, and close them during the
day, whence the moon is often called the 'lover, or lord of the
lotuses.'

61. _The very centre of the sacred fire_.

Fire was an important object of veneration with the Hindús, as
with the ancient Persians. Perhaps the chief worship recognized
in the Vedas is that of Fire and the Sun. The holy fire was
deposited in a hallowed part of the house, or in a sacred
building, and kept perpetually burning. Every morning and
evening, oblations were offered to it by dropping clarified
butter and other substances into the flame, accompanied with
prayers and invocations.

62. _As in the sacred tree the mystic fire_.

Literally, 'as the [S']ami-tree is pregnant with fire.' The legend
is, that the goddess Párvatí, being one day under the influence
of love, reposed on a trunk of this tree, whereby a sympathetic
warmth was generated in the pith or interior of the wood, which
ever after broke into a sacred flame on the slightest attrition.

63 _Hastinápur_.

The ancient Delhi, situated on the Ganges, and the capital of
Dushyanta. Its site is about fifty miles from the modern Delhi,
which is on the Jumná,

64 _E'en as Yayáti [S']armishthá adored_,

[S']armishthá was the daughter of Vrishaparvan, king of the
demons, and wife of Yayáti, son of Nahusha, one of the princes of
the Lunar dynasty, and ancestor of Dushyanta. Puru was the son of
Yayáti, by [S']armishthá.

65 _And for whose encircling bed, Sacred Kusa-grass is spread_.

At a sacrifice, sacred fires were lighted at the four cardinal
points, and Ku[s']a-grass was scattered around each fire,  66
_Koïl_,

The Koïl, or Kokil, is the Indian cuckoo. It is sometimes called
Para-bhrita ('nourished by another'). because the female is known
to leave her eggs in the nest of the crow to be hatched. The bird
is as great a favourite with Indian poets as the nightingale with
European. One of its names is 'Messenger of Spring.' Its note is
a constant subject of allusion, and is described as beautifully
sweet, and, if heard on a journey, indicative of good fortune.
Everything, however, is beautiful by comparison. The song of the
Koïl is not only very dissimilar, but very inferior to that of
the nightingale,

67 _The peacock on the lawn Ceases its dance_,

The Indian peacock is very restless, especially at the approach
of rain, in which it is thought to take delight. Its circular
movements are a frequent subject of allusion with Hindú poets,
and are often by them compared to dancing.

68. _The moonlight of the grove_.

The name of [S']akoontalá's favourite jasmine, spoken of in the 1st
Act. See page 15 of this volume.

69. _Fig-tree_.

Not the Banyan-tree (_Ficus Indica_), nor the Pippala (_Ficus
religiosa_), but the Glomerous Fig-tree (_Ficus glomerata_),
which yields a resinous milky juice from its bark, and is large
enough to afford abundant shade.

70. _The poor female Chakraváka_.

Compare note 56.

71. _Like a young tendril of the sandal-tree torn from its home
in the western mountains_.

The sandal is a kind of large myrtle with pointed leaves (_Sirium
myrtifolium_). The wood affords many highly esteemed perfumes,
unguents, etc., and is celebrated for its delicious scent. It is
chiefly found on the slopes of the Malaya mountain or Western
Ghauts on the Malabar coast. The roots of the tree are said to be
infested with snakes. Indeed it seems to pay dearly for the
fragrance of its wood: 'The root is infested by serpents, the
blossoms by bees, the branches by monkeys, the summit by bears.
In short there is not a part of the sandal-tree that is not
occupied by the vilest impurities.' Hitopade[s']a, verse 162.

72. _The calm seclusion of thy former home_.

'When the father of a family perceives his own wrinkles and grey
hair, committing the care of his wife to his sons, or accompanied
by her, let him repair to the woods and become a hermit.'--Manu,
vi. 2. It was usual for kings, at a certain time of life, to
abdicate the throne in favour of the heir-apparent, and pass the
remainder of their days in seclusion.

73. _A frequent offering to our household gods_.

This was an offering (_bali_) in honour of those spiritual
beings called 'household deities,' which were supposed to hover
round and protect houses. It was made by throwing up into the air
in some part of the house (generally at the door) the remains of
the morning and evening meal of rice or grain, uttering at the
same time a _mantra_, or prayer.

74. _In other states of being_.

Dim recollections of occurrences in sions by wealthy Hindús
(see my 'Bráhmanism and Hindúism,' p. 306).

100. _The mother of the great Indra_.

That is, Adití, the wife of Ka[s']yapa, with whom, in their sacred
retreat, [S']akoontalá was enjoying an asylum.

101. _Distinguishes the milk from worthless water_.

The Hindús imagine that the flamingo (a kind of goose) is the
vehicle on which the god Brahmá is borne through the air; and
that this bird, being fond of the pulpy fibres of the water-lily,
has been gifted by him with the power of separating the milky
from the watery portion of the juice contained in the stalk of
that plant.

102. _Mátali_.

The charioteer of Indra. In the pictures which represent this god
mounted on his usual vehicle--an elephant called Aírávata--Mátali
is seen seated before him on the withers of the animal, acting as
its driver. In the plays, however, Indra is generally represented
borne in a chariot drawn by two horses, guided by Mátali.

103. _Kálanemi_.

A Daitya or demon, with a hundred arms and as many heads.

104. _Nárada_.

A celebrated divine sage, usually reckoned among the ten
patriarchs first created by Brahmá. He acted as a messenger of
the gods.

105. _Tinged with celestial sandal from the breast_.

The breast of Indra was dyed yellow with a fragrant kind of
sandal-wood (_hari-chandana_); and the garland by rubbing
against it, became tinged with the same color. Wreaths and
garlands of flowers are much used by the Hindús as marks of
honorary distinction, as well as for ornament or festive
occasions. They are suspended round the neck.

106. _The ever-blooming tree of Nandana_.

That is, Mandára, one of the five ever-blooming trees of Nandana,
or Swarga, Indra's heaven. The two most celebrated of these trees
were the Párijáta and the Kalpa-druma, or tree granting all
desires. Each of the superior Hindú gods has a heaven, paradise,
or elysium of his own. That of Brahmá is called Brahma-loka,
situate on the summit of mount Meru; that of Vishnu is Vaikuntha,
on the Himálayas; that of [S']iva and Kuvera is Kailása, also on
the Himálayas; that of Indra is Swarga or Nandana. The latter,
though properly on the summit of mount Meru, below Brahmá's
paradise, is sometimes identified with the sphere of the sky or
heaven in general. It is the only heaven of orthodox Bráhmanism.

107. _Jayanta_.

The son of Indra by his favourite wife Paulomí or [S']achí.

108. _The Lion-man's terrific claws_.

Vishnu, in the monstrous shape of a creature half man, half lion
(his fourth Avatár or incarnation), delivered the three worlds,
that is to say, Earth, Heaven, and the lower regions, from the
tyranny of an insolent demon called Hiranya-ka[S']ipu.

109. _We journey in the path of Parivaha_.

The Hindús divide the heavens into seven Márgas, paths or
orbits, assigning a particular wind to each. The sixth of these
paths is that of the Great Bear, and its peculiar wind is called
Parivaha. This wind is supposed to bear along the seven stars of
Ursa Major, and to propel the heavenly Ganges.

110. _The triple Ganges_.

The Ganges was supposed to take its rise in the toe of Vishnu
(whence one of its names, Vishnu-padí); thence it flowed through
the heavenly sphere, being borne along by the wind Parivaha, and
identified with the Mandákiní, or Milky Way. Its second course is
through the earth; but the weight of its descent was borne by
[S']iva's head, whence, after wandering among the tresses of his
hair, it descended through a chasm in the Himálayas. Its third
course is through Pátála, or the lower regions, the residence of
the Daityas and Nágas, and not to be confounded with Naraka,
'hell,' 'the place of punishment.'

111. _He spanned the heavens in his second stride_.

The story of Vishnu's second stride was this:--An Asura or
Daitya, named Bali, had, by his devotions, gained the dominion of
Heaven, Earth, and Pátála. Vishnu undertook to trick him out of
his power, and assuming the form of a Vámana, or dwarf (his fifth
Avatár), he appeared before the giant and begged as a boon as
much land as he could pace in three steps. This was granted; and
the god immediately expanded himself till he filled the world;
deprived Bali, at the first step, of Earth; at the second, of
Heaven; but, in consideration of some merit, left Pátála still
under his rule.

112. _I see the moisture-loving Chátakas_.

The Chátaka is a kind of Cuckoo (_Cuculus Melanoleucus_). The
Hindús suppose that it drinks only the water of the clouds, and
their poets usually introduce allusions to this bird in connexion
with cloudy or rainy weather.

113. _Golden-peak_.

A sacred range of mountains lying among the Himálaya chain, and
apparently identical with, or immediately adjacent to, Kailása,
the paradise of Kuvera, the god of wealth. It is here described
as the mountain of the Kimpurashas, or servants of Kuvera. They
are a dwarfish kind of monster, with the body of a man and the
head of a horse, and are otherwise called Kinnara.

114. _Ka[s']yapa_.

Ka[s']yapa was the son of Brahmá's son, Maríchi, and was one of
those Patriarchs (created by Brahmá to supply the universe with
inhabitants) who, after fulfilling their mission, retired from
the world to practise penance. He was a progenitor on a
magnificent scale, as he is considered to have been the father of
the gods, demons, man, fish, reptiles, and all animals, by the
thirteen daughters of Daksha. The eldest of the thirteen, his
favourite wife, was Adití, from whom were born Indra and all the
inferior gods, and particularly the twelve Ádityas, or forms of
the sun, which represent him in the several months of the year.
From Diti, Danu, and others of the remaining twelve, came the
Daityas, Dánavas, and other demons.

115. _No sacred cord is twined_.

The serpent's skin was used by the ascetic in place of the
regular Bráhmanical cord. This thread or cord, sometimes called
the sacrificial cord, might be made of various substances, such
as cotton, hempen or woollen thread, according to the class of
the wearer; and was worn over the left shoulder and under the
right. The rite of investiture with this thread, which conferred
the title of 'twice-born,' and corresponded in some respects with
the Christian rite of baptism, was performed on youths of the
first three classes (compare note 80), at ages varying from eight
to sixteen, from eleven to twenty-two, and from twelve to
twenty-four, respectively. At present the Bráhmans alone, and
those who claim to be Kshatriyas, have a right to wear this
thread. Not long since, a Káyath (or man of the writer caste) in
Bengal, who attempted to claim it, was excommunicated.

116. _And birds construct their nests within its folds_.

Such was the immovable impassiveness of this ascetic, that the
ants had thrown up their mound as high as his waist without being
disturbed, and birds had built their nests in his hair.

117. _And need no other nourishment_.

The Hindús imagine that living upon air is a proof of the highest
degree of spirituality to which a man can attain.

118. _A[s']oka-tree_.

The A[s']oka (_Jonesia Asoka_) is one of the most beautiful of
Indian trees. Sir W. Jones observes that 'the vegetable world
scarce exhibits a richer sight than an A[s']oka-tree in full bloom'.
It is about as high as an ordinary cherry-tree. The flowers are
very large, and beautifully diversified with tints of
orange-scarlet, of pale yellow, and of bright orange, which form
a variety of shades according to the age of the blossom.

119. _And with his artless smiles Gladdens their hearts_.

Chézy is enraptured with this verse: ' ... strophe incomparable,
que tout père, ou plutôt toute mère, ne pourra lire sans sentir
battre son coeur, tant le poète a su y rendre, avec les nuances
les plus délicates, l'expression vivante de l'amour maternel.'
Compare Statius, Theb., book v. line 613.

  'Heu ubi siderei vultus? ubi verba ligatis
  Imperfecta sonis? risusque et murmura soli
  Intellecta mihi?'

 120. _It is against propriety to make too minute inquiries
about the wife of another man_.

The Hindús were very careful to screen their wives from the curiosity
of strangers; and their great lawgiver, Manu, enjoined that married
women should be cautiously guarded by their husbands in the inner
apartments (_antahpura_) appropriated to women (called by the
Muhammadans, Haram, and in common parlance, in India _andar-mahall_).
The chief duty of a married woman's life seems to have been to keep as
quiet as possible, to know as little as possible, to hear, see, and
inquire about nothing; and above all, to avoid being herself the
subject of conversation or inquiry; in short, the sole end and object
of her existence was to act as a good head-servant, yielding to her
husband a servile obedience, regulating the affairs of his family,
preparing his daily food, and superintending his household. (Manu, ix.
11, 16.) But notwithstanding the social restrictions to which women
were subjected, even in the earlier periods of Indian history, it
seems probable that they were not rigidly excluded from general
society until after the introduction of Muhammadan customs into India.
It appears from the plays that they were allowed to go into public on
certain occasions; they took part in bridal processions, and were
permitted to enter the temples of the gods, [S']akoontalá appears in
the court of King Dushyanta and pleads her own cause; and Vásavadattá,
in the Ratnávalí, holds a conversation with her father's envoy. Even
in later times, the presence of men, other than husbands or sons, in
the inner apartments, was far from being prohibited. See Wilson's
Hindú Theatre, p. xliii.

121. _Her long hair Twined in a single braid_.

Hindú women collect their hair into a single long braid as a sign
of mourning, when their husbands are dead or absent for a long
period.

122. _Shines forth from dim eclipse_.

The following is the Hindú notion of an eclipse:--A certain
demon, which had the ticense when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all wa